
p r o l o g u e


fortress of the light


pedron nialls aged gaze wandered about his private audience chamber, but
dark eyes hazed with thought saw nothing. tattered wall hangings, once battle
banners of the enemies of his youth, faded into dark wood paneling laid over
stone walls, thick even here in the heart of the fortress of the light. the
single chair in the roomheavy, highbacked, and almost a thronewas as
invisible to him as the few scattered tables that completed the furnishings.
even the whitecloaked man kneeling with barely restrained eagerness on the
great sunburst set in the wide planks of the floor had vanished from nialls
mind for the moment, though few would have dismissed him so lightly.
jaret byar had been given time to wash before being brought to niall, but
both his helmet and his breastplate were dulled from travel and battered from
use. dark, deepset eyes shone with a feverish, urgent light in a face that
seemed to have had every spare scrap of flesh boiled away. he wore no sword
none was allowed in nialls presencebut he seemed poised on the edge
of violence, like a hound awaiting the loosing of the leash.
twin fires on long hearths at either end of the room held off the late winter
cold. it was a plain, soldiers room, really, everything well made but nothing
extravagantexcept for the sunburst. furnishings came to the audience
chamber of the lord captain commander of the children of the light with
the man who rose to the office; the flaring sun of coin gold had been worn
smooth by generations of petitioners, replaced and worn smooth again. gold
enough to buy any estate in amadicia, and the patent of nobility to go with it.
for ten years niall had walked across that gold and never thought of it twice,
any more than he thought of the sunburst embroidered across the chest of his
white tunic. gold held little interest for pedron niall.


 eventually his eyes went back to the table next to him, covered with maps
and scattered letters and reports. three loosely rolled drawings lay among the
jumble. he took one up reluctantly. it did not matter which; all depicted the
same scene, though by different hands.
nialls skin was as thin as scraped parchment, drawn tight by age over a
body that seemed all bone and sinew, but there was nothing of frailty about
him. no man held nialls office before his hair was white, nor did any man
softer than the stones of the dome of truth. still, he was suddenly aware of
the tendonridged back of the hand holding the drawing, aware of the need for
haste. time was growing short. his time was growing short. it had to be
enough. he had to make it enough.
he made himself unroll the thick parchment halfway, just enough to see the
face that interested him. the chalks were a little smudged from travel in
saddlebags, but the face was clear. a grayeyed youth with reddish hair. he
looked tall, but it was hard to say for certain. aside from the hair and the
eyes, he could have been set down in any town without exciting comment.
this . . . this boy has proclaimed himself the dragon reborn? niall
muttered.
the dragon. the name made him feel the chills of winter and age. the
name borne by lews therin telamon when he doomed every man who could
channel the one power, then or ever after, to insanity and death, himself
among them. it was more than three thousand years since aes sedai pride and
the war of the shadow had brought an end to the age of legends. three
thousand years, but prophecy and legend helped men rememberthe heart of
it, at least, if the details were gone. lews therin kinslayer. the man who had
begun the breaking of the world, when madmen who could tap the power that
drove the universe leveled mountains and sank ancient lands beneath the seas,
when the whole face of the earth had been changed and all who survived fled
like beasts before a wildfire. it had not ended until the last male aes sedai lay
dead, and a scattered human race could begin trying to rebuild from the
rubblewhere even rubble remained. it was burned into memory by the
stories mothers told children. and prophecy said the dragon would be born
again.
niall had not really meant it for a question, but byar took it for one. yes,
my lord captain commander, he has. it is a worse madness than any false
dragon ive ever heard of. thousands have declared for him already. tarabon
and arad doman are in civil war, as well as at war with each other. there is
fighting all across almoth plain and toman head, taraboner against domani


 against darkfriends crying for the dragonor there was fighting until winter
chilled most of it. ive never seen it spread so quickly, my lord captain
commander. like throwing a lantern into a hay barn. the snow may have
damped it down, but come spring, the flames will burst out hotter than
before.
niall cut him off with a raised finger. twice already niall had let him tell
his story through, his voice burning with anger and hate. parts of it niall
knew from other sources, and in some areas he knew more than byar, but
each time he heard it, it goaded him anew. geofram bornhald and a thousand
of the children dead. and aes sedai did it. you have no doubts, child byar?
none, my lord captain commander. after a skirmish on the way to
falme, i saw two of the tar valon witches. they cost us more than fifty dead
before we stuck them full of arrows.
you are suresure they were aes sedai?
the ground erupted under our feet. byars voice was firm and full of
belief. he had little imagination, did jaret byar; death was part of a soldiers
life, however it came. lightnings struck our ranks out of a clear sky. my
lord captain commander, what else could they have been?
niall nodded grimly. there had been no male aes sedai since the breaking
of the world, but the women who still claimed that title were bad enough.
they prated of their three oaths: to speak no word that was not true, to make
no weapon for one man to kill another, to use the one power as a weapon
only against darkfriends or shadowspawn. but now they had showed those
oaths for the lies they were. he had always known no one could want the
power they wielded except to challenge the creator, and that meant to serve
the dark one.
and you know nothing of those who took falme and killed half of one of
my legions?
lord captain bornhald said they called themselves seanchan, my lord
captain commander, byar said stolidly. he said they were darkfriends.
and his charge broke them, even if they killed him. his voice gained
intensity. there were many refugees from the city. everyone i spoke to
agreed the strangers had broken and fled. lord captain bornhald did that.
niall sighed softly. they were almost the same words byar had used the
first two times about the army that had seemingly come out of nowhere to
take falme. a good soldier, niall thought, so geofram bornhald always said,
but not a man to think for himself.


 my lord captain commander, byar said suddenly, lord captain
bornhald did command me to stand aside from the battle. i was to watch, and
report to you. and tell his son, lord dain, how he died.
yes, yes, niall said impatiently. for a moment he studied byars hollowcheeked face, then added, no one doubts your honesty or courage. it is
exactly the sort of thing geofram bornhald would do, facing a battle in which
he feared his entire command might die. and not the sort of thing you have
imagination enough to think up.
there was nothing more to learn from the man. you have done well, child
byar. you have my leave to carry word of geofram bornhalds death to his
son. dain bornhald is with eamon valdanear tar valon at last report. you
may join them.
thank you, my lord captain commander. thank you. byar rose to his
feet and bowed deeply. yet as he straightened, he hesitated. my lord captain
commander, we were betrayed. hatred gave his voice a sawtoothed edge.
by this one darkfriend you spoke of, child byar? he could not keep an
edge out of his own voice. a years planning lay in ruins amid the corpses of
a thousand of the children, and byar wanted to talk only of this one man.
this young blacksmith youve only seen twice, this perrin from the two
rivers?
yes, my lord captain commander. i do not know how, but i know he is to
blame. i know it.
i will see what can be done about him, child byar. byar opened his
mouth again, but niall raised a thin hand to forestall him. you may leave me
now. the gauntfaced man had no choice but to bow again and leave.
as the door closed behind him, niall lowered himself into his highbacked
chair. what had brought on byars hatred of this perrin? there were far too
many darkfriends to waste energy on hating any particular one. too many
darkfriends, high and low, hiding behind glib tongues and open smiles,
serving the dark one. still, one more name added to the lists would do no
harm.
he shifted on the hard chair, trying to find comfort for his old bones. not
for the first time he thought vaguely that perhaps a cushion would not be too
much luxury. and not for the first time, he pushed the thought away. the
world tumbled toward chaos, and he had no time to give in to age.
he let all the signs that foretold disaster swirl through his mind. war


 gripped tarabon and arad doman, civil war ripped at cairhien, and war fever
was rising in tear and illian, old enemies as they were. perhaps these wars
meant nothing in themselvesmen fought warsbut they usually came one
at a time. and aside from the false dragon somewhere on almoth plain,
another tore at saldaea, and a third plagued tear. three at once. they must all
be false dragons. they must be!
a dozen small things besides, some perhaps only baseless rumors, but
taken together with the rest. . . . sightings of aiel reported as far west as
murandy, and kandor. only two or three in one place, but one or a thousand,
aiel had come out of the waste just once in all the years since the breaking.
only in the aiel war had they ever left that desolate wilderness. the athaan
miere, the sea folk, were said to be ignoring trade to seek signs and portents
of what, exactly, they did not saysailing with ships half full or even
empty. illian had called the great hunt of the horn for the first time in almost
four hundred years, had sent out the hunters to seek the fabled horn of
valere, which prophecy said would summon dead heroes from the grave to
fight in tarmon gaidon, the last battle against the shadow. rumor said the
ogier, always so reclusive that most common people thought them only
legend, had called meetings between their farflung stedding.
most telling of all, to niall, the aes sedai had apparently come into the
open. it was said they had sent some of their sisters to saldaea to confront the
false dragon mazrim taim. rare as it was in men, taim could channel the
one power. that was a thing to fear and despise in itself, and few thought a
man like that could be defeated except with the aid of aes sedai. better to
allow aes sedai help than to face the inevitable horrors when he went mad, as
such men inevitably did. but tar valon had apparently sent other aes sedai to
support the other false dragon at falme. nothing else fit the facts.
the pattern chilled the marrow in his bones. chaos multiplied; what was
unheard of, happening again and again. the whole world seemed to be
milling, stirring near the boil. it was clear to him. the last battle really was
coming.
all his plans were destroyed, the plans that would have secured his name
among the children of the light for a hundred generations. but turmoil meant
opportunity, and he had new plans, with new objectives. if he could keep the
strength and will to carry them out. light, let me hold on to life long enough.
a deferential tap on the door brought him out of his dark thoughts.
come! he snapped.


 a servant in coat and breeches of whiteandgold bowed his way in. eyes
to the floor, he announced that jaichim carridin, anointed of the light,
inquisitor of the hand of the light, came at the command of the lord captain
commander. carridin appeared on the mans heels, not waiting for niall to
speak. niall gestured the servant to leave.
before the door was fully closed again, carridin dropped to one knee with
a flourish of his snowy cloak. behind the sunburst on the cloaks breast lay
the scarlet shepherds crook of the hand of the light, called the questioners
by many, though seldom to their faces. as you have commanded my
presence, my lord captain commander, he said in a strong voice, so have i
returned from tarabon.
niall examined him for a moment. carridin was tall, well into his middle
years, with a touch of gray in his hair, yet fit and hard. his dark, deepset eyes
had a knowing look about them, as always. and he did not blink under the
silent study of the lord captain commander. few men had consciences so
clear or nerves so steady. carridin knelt there, waiting as calmly as if it were
an everyday matter to be ordered curtly to leave his command and return to
amador without delay, no reasons given. but then, it was said jaichim
carridin could outwait a stone.
rise, child carridin. as the other man straightened, niall added, i have
had disturbing news from falme.
carridin straightened the folds of his cloak as he answered. his voice rode
the edge of suitable respect, almost as if he spoke to an equal rather than to
the man he had sworn to obey to the death. my lord captain commander
refers to the news brought by child jaret byar, late second to lord captain
bornhald.
the corner of nialls left eye fluttered, an old presage of anger. supposedly
only three men knew byar was in amador, and none besides niall knew from
where he came. do not be too clever, carridin. your desire to know
everything may one day lead you into the hands of your own questioners.
carridin showed no reaction beyond a slight tightening of his mouth at the
name. my lord captain commander, the hand seeks out truth everywhere,
to serve the light.
to serve the light. not to serve the children of the light. all the children
served the light, but pedron niall often wondered if the questioners really
considered themselves part of the children at all. and what truth do you
have for me about what occurred in falme?


 darkfriends, my lord captain commander.
darkfriends? nialls chuckle held no amusement. a few weeks gone i
was receiving reports from you that geofram bornhald was a servant of the
dark one because he moved soldiers onto toman head against your orders.
his voice became dangerously soft. do you now mean me to believe that
bornhald, as a darkfriend, led a thousand of the children to their deaths
fighting other darkfriends?
whether or not he was a darkfriend will never be known, carridin said
blandly, since he died before he could be put to the question. the shadows
plots are murky, and often seem mad to those who walk in the light. but that
those who seized falme were darkfriends, i have no doubt. darkfriends and
aes sedai, in support of a false dragon. it was the one power that destroyed
bornhald and his men, of that i am sure, my lord captain commander, just
as it destroyed the armies that tarabon and arad doman sent against the
darkfriends in falme.
and what of the stories that those who took falme came from across the
aryth ocean?
carridin shook his head. my lord captain commander, the people are full
of rumors. some claim they were the armies artur hawkwing sent across the
ocean a thousand years ago, come back to claim the land. why, some even
claim to have seen hawkwing himself in falme. and half the heroes of
legend besides. the west is boiling from tarabon to saldaea, and a hundred
new rumors bubble to the surface every day, each more outrageous than the
last. these socalled seanchan were no more than another rabble of
darkfriends gathered to support a false dragon, only this time with open aes
sedai support.
what proof have you? niall made his voice sound as if he doubted the
point. you have prisoners?
no, my lord captain commander. as child byar no doubt told you,
bornhald managed to hurt them badly enough that they dispersed. and
certainly no one weve questioned would admit to supporting a false dragon.
as for proof . . . it lies in two parts. if my lord captain commander will
permit me?
niall gestured impatiently.
the first part is negative. few ships have tried to cross the aryth ocean,
and most never returned. those that did, turned back before they ran out of
food and water. even the sea folk will not cross the aryth, and they sail


 wherever there is trade, even to the lands beyond the aiel waste. my lord
captain commander, if there are any lands across the ocean, they are too far
to reach, the ocean too wide. to carry an army across it would be as
impossible as flying.
perhaps, niall said slowly. it is certainly indicative. what is your
second part?
my lord captain commander, many of those we questioned spoke of
monsters fighting for the darkfriends, and held to their claims even under the
last degree of the question. what could they be but trollocs and other
shadowspawn, in some way brought down from the blight? carridin spread
his hands as if that were conclusive. most people think trollocs are only
travelers tales and lies, and most of the rest think they were all killed in the
trolloc wars. what other name would they put to a trolloc but monster?
yes. yes, you may be right, child carridin. may be, i say. he would not
give carridin the satisfaction of knowing he agreed. let him work awhile.
but what of him? he indicated the rolled drawings. if he knew carridin, the
inquisitor had copies in his own chambers. how dangerous is he? can he
channel the one power?
the inquisitor merely shrugged. perhaps he can channel, perhaps not. aes
sedai could no doubt make people believe a cat could channel, if they wanted
to. as to how dangerous he is. . . . any false dragon is dangerous until he is
put down, and one with tar valon openly behind him is ten times dangerous.
but he is less dangerous now than he will be in half a year, unchecked. the
captives i questioned had never seen him, had no idea where he is now. his
forces are fragmented. i doubt there are more than two hundred gathered in
any one place. the taraboners or the domani, either one, could sweep them
away if they werent so busy fighting each other.
even a false dragon, niall said dryly, is not enough to make them forget
four hundred years of squabbling over possession of almoth plain. as if
either of them ever had the strength to hold it. carridins face did not change,
and niall wondered how he could keep so calm. you will not be calm much
longer, questioner.
it is of no import, my lord captain commander. winter keeps them all in
their camps, except for scattered skirmishes and raids. when the weather
warms enough for troops to move. . . . bornhald took only half his legion to
their deaths on toman head. with the other half, i will hunt this false dragon
to his death. a corpse is not dangerous to anyone.


 and if you face what it seems bornhald faced? aes sedai channeling the
power to kill?
their witchery doesnt protect them from arrows, or a knife in the dark.
they die as quickly as anyone else. carridin smiled. i promise you, i will
be successful before summer.
niall nodded. the man was confident, now. sure the dangerous questions
would already have come, if they were coming. you should have remembered,
carridin, i was accounted a fine tactician. why, he said quietly, did you
not take your own forces to falme? with darkfriends on toman head, an
army of them holding falme, why did you try to stop bornhald?
carridin blinked, but his voice remained steady. at first they were only
rumors, my lord captain commander. rumors so wild, no one could believe.
by the time i learned the truth, bornhald had joined battle. he was dead, and
the darkfriends scattered. besides, my task was to bring the light to almoth
plain. i could not disobey my orders to chase after rumors.
your task? niall said, his voice rising as he stood. carridin topped him
by a head, but the inquisitor stepped back. your task? your task was to seize
almoth plain! an empty bucket that no one holds except by words and
claims, and all you had to do was fill it. the nation of almoth would have
lived again, ruled by the children of the light, with no need to pay lip service
to a fool of a king. amadicia and almoth, a vise gripping tarabon. in five
years we would have held sway there as much as here in amadicia. and you
made a dogs dinner of it!
the smile went at last. my lord captain commander, carridin protested.
how could i foresee what happened? yet another false dragon. tarabon and
arad doman finally going to war after so long merely growling at each other.
and aes sedai revealing their true selves after three thousand years of
dissembling! even with that, though, all is not lost. i can find and destroy this
false dragon before his followers unite. and once the taraboners and domani
have weakened themselves, they can be cleared from the plain without
no! niall snapped. your plans are done with, carridin. perhaps i should
hand you over to your own questioners right now. the high inquisitor would
not object. he is gnashing his teeth to find someone to blame for what
happened. he would never put forward one of his own, but i doubt hed
quibble if i named you. a few days under the question, and you would
confess to anything. name yourself darkfriend, even. you would go under the
headsmans axe inside a week.


 there was sweat beading on carridins forehead. my lord captain
commander. . . . he stopped to swallow. my lord captain commander
seems to be saying there is another way. if he will but speak it, i am sworn to
obey.
now, niall thought. now to toss the dice. prickles ran across his skin, as if
he were in battle and had suddenly realized that every man for a hundred
paces around him was an enemy. lord captain commanders did not go to the
headsman, but more than one had been known to die suddenly and
unexpectedly, swiftly mourned and swiftly replaced by men with less
dangerous ideas.
child carridin, he said firmly, you will make certain that this false
dragon does not die. and if any aes sedai come to oppose rather than
support him, you will make use of your knives in the dark. 
the inquisitors jaw dropped. yet he recovered quickly, eyeing niall in a
speculative fashion. to kill aes sedai is a duty, but. . . . to allow a false
dragon to roam free? that . . . that would be . . . treason. and blasphemy.
niall drew a deep breath. he could sense the unseen knives waiting in the
shadows. but he was committed, now. it is no treason to do what must be
done. and even blasphemy can be tolerated for a cause. those two sentences
alone were enough to kill him. do you know how to unite people behind
you, child carridin? the quickest way? no? loose a liona rabid lionin
the streets. and when panic grips the people, once it has turned their bowels
to water, calmly tell them you will deal with it. then you kill it, and order
them to hang the carcass up where everyone can see. before they have time to
think, you give another order, and it will be obeyed. and if you continue to
give orders, they will continue to obey, for you will be the one who saved
them, and who better to lead?
carridin moved his head uncertainly. do you mean to . . . take it all, my
lord captain commander? not just almoth plain, but tarabon and arad
doman as well?
what i mean is for me to know. it is for you to obey as you are sworn to
do. i expect to hear of messengers on fast horses leaving for the plain by
tonight. i am certain you know how to word the orders so no one suspects
what they should not. if you must harry someone, let it be the taraboners and
domani. it would not do to have them kill my lion. no, under the light, we
shall force peace between them.
as my lord captain commander commands, carridin said smoothly. i


 hear and obey. too smoothly.
niall smiled a cold smile. in case your oath is not strong enough, know
this. if this false dragon dies before i command his death, or if he is taken by
the tar valon witches, you will be found one morning with a dagger in your
heart. and should any . . . accident . . . befall meeven if i should die of old
ageyou will not survive me the month.
my lord captain commander, i have sworn to obey
so you have. niall cut him off. see that you remember it. now, go!
as my lord captain commander commands. this time carridins voice
was not so steady.
the door closed behind the inquisitor. niall rubbed his hands together. he
felt cold. the dice were spinning, with no way of telling what pips would
show when they stopped. the last battle truly was coming. not the tarmon
gaidon of legend, with the dark one breaking free to be faced by the dragon
reborn. not that, he was sure. the aes sedai of the age of legends might
have made a hole in the dark ones prison at shayol ghul, but lews therin
kinslayer and his hundred companions had sealed it up again. the
counterstroke had tainted the male half of the true source forever and driven
them mad, and so begun the breaking, but one of those ancient aes sedai
could do what ten of the tar valon witches of today could not. the seals they
had made would hold.
pedron niall was a man of cold logic, and he had reasoned out how tarmon
gaidon would be. bestial trolloc hordes rolling south out of the great blight
as they had in the trolloc wars, two thousand years before, with the
myrddraalthe halfmenleading, and perhaps even new human dreadlords
from among the darkfriends. humankind, split into nations squabbling
among themselves, could not stand against that. but he, pedron niall, would
unite humankind behind the banners of the children of the light. there
would be new legends, to tell how pedron niall had fought tarmon gaidon,
and won.
first, he murmured, loose a rabid lion in the streets.
a rabid lion?
niall spun on his heel as a bony little man with a huge beak of a nose
slipped from behind one of the hanging banners. there was just a glimpse of a
panel swinging shut as the banner fell back against the wall.
i showed you that passage, ordeith, niall snapped, so you could come


 when i summoned you without half the fortress knowing, not so you could
listen to my private conversation.
ordeith made a smooth bow as he crossed the room. listen, great lord? i
would never do such a thing. i only just arrived and could not avoid hearing
your final words. no more than that. he wore a halfmocking smile, but it
never left his face that niall had ever seen, even when the fellow had no
reason to know anyone was watching.
a month before, in the dead of winter, the gangly little man had arrived in
amadicia, ragged and halffrozen, and somehow managed to talk his way
through all the layers of guards to pedron niall himself. he seemed to know
things about events on toman head that were not in carridins voluminous if
obscure reports, or in byars tale, or in any other report or rumor that had
come to niall. his name was a lie, of course. in the old tongue, ordeith
meant wormwood. when niall challenged him on it, though, all he said
was, who we were is lost to all men, and life is bitter. but he was clever. it
had been he who helped niall see the pattern emerging in events.
ordeith moved to the table and took up one of the drawings. as he unrolled
it enough to reveal the young mans face, his smile deepened to nearly a
grimace.
niall was still irritated that the man had come unsummoned. you find a
false dragon funny, ordeith. or does he frighten you?
a false dragon? ordeith said softly. yes. yes, of course, it must be.
who else could it be. and he barked a shrill laugh that grated on nialls
nerves. sometimes niall thought ordeith was at least halfmad.
but he is clever, mad or not. what do you mean, ordeith? you sound as if
you know him.
ordeith gave a start, as though he had forgotten the lord captain
commander was there. know him? oh, yes, i know him. his name is rand
althor. he comes from the two rivers, in the backcountry of andor, and he
is a darkfriend so deep in the shadow it would make your soul cringe to
know the half.
the two rivers, niall mused. someone else mentioned another
darkfriend from there, another youth. strange to think of darkfriends coming
from a place like that. but truly they are everywhere.
another, great lord? ordeith said. from the two rivers? would that
be matrim cauthon or perrin aybara? they are of an age with him, and close


 behind in evil.
his name was given as perrin, niall said, frowning. three of them, you
say? nothing comes out of the two rivers but wool and tabac. i doubt if
there is another place men live that is more isolated from the rest of the
world.
in a city, darkfriends must hide their nature to one extent or another. they
must associate with others, with strangers come from other places and leaving
to take word of what they have seen. but in quiet villages, cut off from the
world, where few outsiders ever go. . . . what better places for all to be
darkfriends?
how is it you know the names of three darkfriends, ordeith? three
darkfriends from the far end of forever. you keep too many secrets,
wormwood, and pull more surprises from your sleeve than a gleeman.
how can any man tell all that he knows, great lord, the little man said
smoothly. it would be only prattle, until it becomes useful. i will tell you
this, great lord. this rand althor, this dragon, has deep roots in the two
rivers.
false dragon! niall said sharply, and the other man bowed.
of course, great lord. i misspoke myself.
suddenly niall became aware of the drawing crumpled and torn in
ordeiths hands. even while the mans face remained smooth except for that
sardonic smile, his hands twitched convulsively around the parchment.
stop that! niall commanded. he snatched the drawing away from
ordeith and smoothed it as best he could. i do not have so many likenesses
of this man that i can allow them to be destroyed. much of the drawing was
only a smudge, and a rip ran across the young mans breast, but miraculously
the face was untouched.
forgive me, great lord. ordeith made a deep bow, his smile never
slipping. i hate darkfriends.
niall studied the face in chalks. rand althor, of the two rivers. perhaps i
must make plans for the two rivers. when the snows clear. perhaps.
as the great lord wishes, ordeith said blandly.
the grimace on carridins face as he strode through the halls of the fortress
made other men avoid him, though in truth few sought the company of


 questioners. servants, hurrying about their tasks, tried to fade into the stone
walls, and even men with golden knots of rank on their white cloaks took side
corridors when they saw his face.
he flung open the door to his rooms and slammed it behind him, feeling
none of the usual satisfaction at the fine carpets from tarabon and tear in lush
reds and golds and blues, the beveled mirrors from illian, the goldleaf work
on the long, intricately carved table in the middle of the floor. a master
craftsman from lugard had worked nearly a year on that. this time he barely
saw it.
sharbon! for once his body servant did not appear. the man was
supposed to be readying the rooms. the light burn you, sharbon! where are
you?
a movement caught the corner of his eye, and he turned ready to shrivel
sharbon with his curses. the curses themselves shriveled as a myrddraal took
another step toward him with the sinuous grace of a serpent.
it was a man in form, no larger than most, but there the resemblance ended.
dead black clothes and cloak, hardly seeming to stir as it moved, made its
maggotwhite skin appear ever paler. and it had no eyes. that eyeless gaze
filled carridin with fear, as it had filled thousands before.
wha. . . . carridin stopped to work moisture back into his mouth, to try
bringing his voice back down to its normal register. what are you doing
here? it still sounded shrill.
the halfmans bloodless lips quirked in a smile. where there is shadow,
there may i go. its voice sounded like a snake rustling through dead leaves.
i like to keep a watch on all those who serve me.
i ser. . . .
it was no use. with an effort carridin jerked his eyes away from that
smooth expanse of pale, pasty face and turned his back. a shiver ran down his
spine, having his back to a myrddraal. everything was sharp in the mirror on
the wall in front of him. everything but the halfman. the myrddraal was an
indistinct blur. hardly soothing to look at, but better than meeting that stare. a
little strength returned to carridins voice.
i serve the. . . . he cut off, suddenly aware of where he was. in the heart
of the fortress of the light. the rumor of a whisper of the words he was
about to say would have him given to the hand of the light. the lowest of the
children would strike him down on the spot if he heard. he was alone except


 for the myrddraal, and perhaps sharbonwhere is that cursed man? it would
be good to have someone to share the halfmans stare, even if the other would
have to be disposed of afterwardsbut still he lowered his voice. i serve the
great lord of the dark, as you do. we both serve.
if you wish to see it so. the myrddraal laughed, a sound that made
carridins bones shiver. still, i will know why you are here instead of on
almoth plain.
i . . . i was commanded here by word of the lord captain commander.
the myrddraal grated, your lord captain commanders words are dung!
you were commanded to find the human called rand althor and kill him.
that before all else. above all else! why are you not obeying?
carridin took a deep breath. that gaze on his back felt like a knife blade
grating along his spine. things . . . have changed. some matters are not as
much in my control as they were. a harsh, scraping noise jerked his head
around.
the myrddraal was drawing a hand across the tabletop, and thin tendrils of
wood curled away from its fingernails. nothing has changed, human. you
forswore your oaths to the light and swore new oaths, and those oaths you
will obey.
carridin started at the gouges marring the polished wood and swallowed
hard. i dont understand. why is it suddenly so important to kill him? i
thought the great lord of the dark meant to use him.
you question me? i should take your tongue. it is not your part to
question. or to understand. it is your part to obey! you will give dogs lessons
in obedience. do you understand that? heel, dog, and obey your master.
anger wormed its way through the fear, and carridins hand groped at his
side, but his sword was not there. it lay in the next room now, where he had
left it on going to attend pedron niall.
the myrddraal moved faster than a striking viper. carridin opened his
mouth to scream as its hand closed on his wrist in a crushing grip; bones
grated together, sending jolts of agony up his arm. the scream never left his
mouth, though, for the halfmans other hand gripped his chin and forced his
jaws shut. his heels rose up, and then his toes left the floor. grunting and
gurgling, he dangled in the myrddraals grasp.
hear me, human. you will find this youth and kill him as quickly as
possible. do not think you can dissemble. there are others of your children


 who will tell me if you turn aside in your purpose. but i will give you this to
encourage you. if this rand althor is not dead in a month, i will take one of
your blood. a son, a daughter, a sister, an uncle. you will not know who until
the chosen has died screaming. if he lives another month, i will take another.
and then another, and another. and when there is no one of your blood living
except yourself, if he still lives, i will take you to shayol ghul itself. it
smiled. you will be years in the dying, human. do you understand me,
now?
carridin made a sound, half groan, half whimper. he thought his neck was
going to break.
with a snarl, the myrddraal hurled him across the room. carridin slammed
against the far wall and slid to the rug, stunned. facedown, he lay fighting for
breath.
do you understand me, human?
i . . . i hear and obey, carridin managed into the carpet. there was no
answer.
he turned his head, wincing at the pain in his neck. the room was empty
except for him. halfmen rode shadows like horses, so the legends said, and
when they turned sideways, they disappeared. no wall could keep them out.
carridin wanted to weep. he levered himself up, cursing the jolt of pain from
his wrist.
the door opened, and sharbon hurried in, a plump man with a basket in his
arms. he stopped to stare at carridin. master, are you all right? forgive me
for not being here, master, but i went to buy fruits for your
with his good hand carridin struck the basket from sharbons hands,
sending withered winter apples rolling across the carpets, and backhanded the
man across the face.
forgive me, master, sharbon whispered.
fetch me paper and pen and ink, carridin snarled. hurry, fool! i must
send orders. but which? which? as sharbon scurried to obey, carridin
stared at the gouges in the tabletop and shivered.


 c h a p t e r
1


waiting


the wheel of time turns, and ages come and pass, leaving memories that
become legend. legend fades to myth, and even myth is long forgotten when
the age that gave it birth comes again. in one age, called the third age by
some, an age yet to come, an age long past, a wind rose in the mountains of
mist. the wind was not the beginning. there are neither beginnings nor
endings to the turning of the wheel of time. but it was a beginning.
down long valleys the wind swept, valleys blue with morning mist hanging
in the air, some forested with evergreens, some bare where grasses and
wildflowers would soon spring up. it howled across halfburied ruins and
broken monuments, all as forgotten as those who had built them. it moaned in
the passes, weatherworn cuts between peaks capped with snow that never
melted. thick clouds clung to the mountaintops so that snow and white
billows seemed one.
in the lowlands winter was going or gone, yet here in the heights it held
awhile, quilting the mountainsides with broad, white patches. only
evergreens clung to leaf or needle; all other branches stood bare, brown or
gray against the rock and not yet quickened ground. there was no sound but
the crisp rush of wind over snow and stone. the land seemed to be waiting.
waiting for something to burst.
sitting his horse just inside a thicket of leatherleaf and pine, perrin aybara
shivered and tugged his furlined cloak closer, as close as he could with a
longbow in one hand and a great, halfmoon axe at his belt. it was a good axe
of cold steel; perrin had pumped the bellows the day master luhhan had made
it. the wind jerked at his cloak, pulling the hood back from his shaggy curls,
and cut through his coat; he wiggled his toes in his boots for warmth and


 shifted on his highcantled saddle, but his mind was not really on the cold.
eyeing his five companions, he wondered if they, too, felt it. not the waiting
they had been sent there for, but something more.
stepper, his horse, shifted and tossed his head. he had named the dun
stallion for his quick feet, but now stepper seemed to feel his riders irritation
and impatience. i am tired of all this waiting, all this sitting while moiraine
holds us as tight as tongs. burn the aes sedai! when will it end?
he sniffed the wind without thinking. the smell of horse predominated,
and of men and mens sweat. a rabbit had gone through those trees not long
since, fear powering its run, but the fox on its trail had not killed there. he
realized what he was doing, and stopped it. youd think i would get a stuffed
nose with all this wind. he almost wished he did have one. and i wouldnt let
moiraine do anything about it, either.
something tickled the back of his mind. he refused to acknowledge it. he
did not mention his feeling to his companions.
the other five men sat their saddles, short horsebows at the ready, eyes
searching the sky above as well as the thinly treed slopes below. they seemed
unperturbed by the wind flaring their cloaks out like banners. a twohanded
sword hilt stuck up above each mans shoulder through a slit in his cloak. the
sight of their bare heads, shaven except for topknots, made perrin feel colder.
for them, this weather was already well into spring. all softness had been
hammered out of them at a harder forge than he had ever known. they were
shienarans, from the borderlands up along the great blight, where trolloc
raids could come in any night, and even a merchant or a farmer might well
have to take up sword or bow. and these men were no farmers, but soldiers
almost from birth.
he sometimes wondered at the way they deferred to him and followed his
lead. it was as if they thought he had some special right, some knowledge
hidden from them. or maybe its just my friends, he thought wryly. they were
not as tall as he, nor as bigyears as a blacksmiths apprentice had given him
arms and shoulders to make two of most mensbut he had begun shaving
every day to stop their jokes about his youth. friendly jokes, but still jokes.
he would not have them start again because he spoke of a feeling.
with a start, perrin reminded himself that he was supposed to be keeping
watch, too. checking the arrow nocked to his longbow, he peered down the
valley running off to the west, widening as it fell away, the ground streaked
with broad, twisted ribbons of snow, remnants of winter. most of the scattered


 trees down there still clawed the sky with stark winter branches, but enough
evergreenspine and leatherleaf, fir and mountain holly, even a few towering
greenwoodsstood on the slopes and the valley floor to give cover for
anyone who knew how to use it. but no one would be there without a special
purpose. the mines were all far to the south or even further north; most
people thought there was ill luck in the mountains of mist, and few entered
them who could avoid it. perrins eyes glittered like burnished gold.
the tickling became an itch. no!
he could push the itch aside, but the expectation would not go. as if he
teetered on a brink. as if everything teetered. he wondered whether
something unpleasant lay in the mountains around them. there was a way to
know, perhaps. in places like this, where men seldom came, there were almost
always wolves. he crushed the thought before it had a chance to firm. better
to wonder. better than that. their numbers were not many, but they had
scouts. if there was anything out there, the outriders would find it. this is my
forge; ill tend it, and let them tend theirs.
he could see further than the others, so he was first to spot the rider coming
from the direction of tarabon. even to him the rider was only a spot of bright
colors on horseback winding its way through the trees in the distance, now
seen, now hidden. a piebald horse, he thought. and not before time! he
opened his mouth to announce herit would be a woman; each rider before
had beenwhen masema suddenly muttered, raven! like a curse.
perrin jerked his head up. a big black bird was quartering over the treetops
no more than a hundred paces away. its quarry might have been carrion dead
in the snow or some small animal, yet perrin could not take the chance. it did
not seem to have seen them, but the oncoming rider would soon be in its
sight. even as he spotted the raven, his bow came up, and he drew
fletchings to cheek, to earand loosed, all in one smooth motion. he was
dimly aware of the slap of bowstrings beside him, but his attention was all on
the black bird.
of a sudden it cartwheeled in a shower of midnight feathers as his arrow
found it, and tumbled from the sky as two more arrows streaked through the
place where it had been. bows halfdrawn, the other shienarans searched the
sky to see if it had a companion.
does it have to report, perrin asked softly, or does . . . he . . . see what it
sees? he had not meant anyone to hear, but ragan, the youngest of the
shienarans, less than ten years his elder, answered as he fitted another arrow


 to his short bow.
it has to report. to a halfman, usually. in the borderlands there was a
bounty on ravens; no one there ever dared assume any raven was just a bird.
light, if heartsbane saw what the ravens saw, we would all have been dead
before we reached the mountains. ragans voice was easy; it was a matter of
every day to a shienaran soldier.
perrin shivered, not from the cold, and in the back of his head something
snarled a challenge to the death. heartsbane. different names in different
landssoulsbane and heartfang, lord of the grave and lord of the twilight
and everywhere father of lies and the dark one, all to avoid giving him
his true name and drawing his attention. the dark one often used ravens and
crows, rats in the cities. perrin drew another broadhead arrow from the quiver
on his hip that balanced the axe on the other side.
that may be as big as a club, ragan said admiringly, with a glance at
perrins bow, but it can shoot. i would hate to see what it could do to a man
in armor. the shienarans wore only light mail, now, under their plain coats,
but usually they fought in armor, man and horse alike.
too long for horseback, masema sneered. the triangular scar on his dark
cheek twisted his contemptuous grin even more. a good breastplate will stop
even a pile arrow except at close range, and if your first shot fails, the man
youre shooting at will carve your guts out.
that is just it, masema. ragan relaxed a bit as the sky remained empty.
the raven must have been alone. with this two rivers bow, ill wager you
dont have to be so close. masema opened his mouth.
you two stop flapping your bloody tongues! uno snapped. with a long
scar down the left side of his face and that eye gone, his features were hard,
even for a shienaran. he had acquired a painted eyepatch on their way into
the mountains during the autumn; a permanently frowning eye in a fiery red
did nothing to make his stare easier to face. if you cant keep your bloody
minds on the bloody task at hand, ill see if extra flaming guard duty tonight
will bloody settle you. ragan and masema subsided under his stare. he gave
them a last scowl that faded as he turned to perrin. do you see anything
yet? his tone was a little gruffer than he might have used with a commander
put over him by the king of shienar, or the lord of fal dara, yet there was
something in it of readiness to do whatever perrin suggested.
the shienarans knew how far he could see, but they seemed to take it as a
matter of course, that and the color of his eyes, as well. they did not know


 everything, not by half, but they accepted him as he was. as they thought he
was. they seemed to accept everything and anything. the world was
changing, they said. everything spun on the wheels of chance and change. if a
man had eyes a color no mans eyes had ever been, what did it matter, now?
shes coming, perrin said. you should just see her now. there. he
pointed, and uno strained forward, his one real eye squinting, then finally
nodded doubtfully.
theres bloody something moving down there. some of the others
nodded and murmured, too. uno glared at them, and they went back to
studying the sky and the mountains.
suddenly perrin realized what the bright colors on the distant rider meant.
a vivid green skirt peeking out beneath a bright red cloak. shes one of the
traveling people, he said, startled. no one else he had ever heard of dressed
in such brilliant colors and odd combinations, not by choice.
the women they had sometimes met and guided even deeper into the
mountains included every sort: a beggar woman in rags struggling afoot
through a snowstorm; a merchant by herself leading a string of laden
packhorses; a lady in silks and fine furs, with redtasseled reins on her palfrey
and gold worked on her saddle. the beggar departed with a purse of silver
more than perrin thought they could afford to give, until the lady left an even
fatter purse of gold. women from every station in life, all alone, from
tarabon, and ghealdan, and even amadicia. but he had never expected to see
one of the tuathaan.
a bloody tinker? uno exclaimed. the others echoed his surprise.
ragans topknot waved as he shook his head. a tinker wouldnt be mixed
in this. either shes not a tinker, or she is not the one we are supposed to
meet.
tinkers, masema growled. useless cowards.
unos eye narrowed until it looked like the pritchel hole of an anvil; with
the red painted eye on his patch, it gave him a villainous look. cowards,
masema? he said softly. if you were a woman, would you have the flaming
nerve to ride up here, alone and bloody unarmed? there was no doubt she
would be unarmed if she was of the tuathaan. masema kept his mouth shut,
but the scar on his cheek stood out tight and pale.
burn me, if i would, ragan said. and burn me if you would either,
masema. masema hitched at his cloak and ostentatiously searched the sky.


 uno snorted. the light send that flaming carrion eater was flaming
alone, he muttered.
slowly the shaggy brownandwhite mare meandered closer, picking a way
along the clear ground between broad snowbanks. once the brightly clad
woman stopped to peer at something on the ground, then tugged the cowl of
her cloak further over her head and heeled her mount forward in a slow walk.
the raven, perrin thought. stop looking at that bird and come on, woman.
maybe youve brought the word that finally takes us out of here. if moiraine
means to let us leave before spring. burn her! for a moment he was not sure
whether he meant the aes sedai, or the tinker woman who seemed to be
taking her own time.
if she kept on as she was, the woman would pass a good thirty paces to one
side of the thicket. with her eyes fixed on where her piebald stepped, she
gave no sign that she had seen them among the trees.
perrin nudged the stallions flanks with his heels, and the dun leaped ahead,
sending up sprays of snow with his hooves. behind him, uno quietly gave the
command, forward!
stepper was halfway to her before she seemed to become aware of them,
and then she jerked her mare to a halt with a start. she watched as they
formed an arc centered on her. embroidery of eyewrenching blue, in the
pattern called a tairen maze, made her red cloak even more garish. she was
not younggray showed thick in her hair where it was not hidden by her
cowlbut her face had few lines, other than the disapproving frown she ran
over their weapons. if she was alarmed at meeting armed men in the heart of
mountain wilderness, though, she gave no sign. her hands rested easily on the
high pommel of her worn but wellkept saddle. and she did not smell afraid.
stop that! perrin told himself. he made his voice soft so as not to frighten
her. my name is perrin, good mistress. if you need help, i will do what i can.
if not, go with the light. but unless the tuathaan have changed their ways,
you are far from your wagons.
she studied them a moment more before speaking. there was a gentleness
in her dark eyes, not surprising in one of the traveling people. i seek an . . .
a woman.
the skip was small, but it was there. she sought not any woman, but an
aes sedai. does she have a name, good mistress? perrin asked. he had
done this too many times in the last few months to need her reply, but iron
was spoiled for want of care.


 she is called. . . . sometimes, she is called moiraine. my name is leya.
perrin nodded. we will take you to her, mistress leya. we have warm
fires, and with luck something hot to eat. but he did not lift his reins
immediately. how did you find us? he had asked before, each time
moiraine sent him out to wait at a spot she named, for a woman she knew
would come. the answer would be the same as it always was, but he had to
ask.
leya shrugged and answered hesitantly. i . . . knew that if i came this way,
someone would find me and take me to her. i . . . just . . . knew. i have news
for her.
perrin did not ask what news. the women gave the information they
brought only to moiraine.
and the aes sedai tells us what she chooses. he thought. aes sedai never
lied, but it was said that the truth an aes sedai told you was not always the
truth you thought it was. too late for qualms, now. isnt it?
this way, mistress leya, he said, gesturing up the mountain. the
shienarans, with uno at their head, fell in behind perrin and leya as they
began to climb. the borderlanders still studied the sky as much as the land,
and the last two kept a special watch on their backtrail.
for a time they rode in silence except for the sounds the horses hooves
made, sometimes crunching through old snowcrust, sometimes sending rocks
clattering as they crossed bare stretches. now and again leya cast glances at
perrin, at his bow, his axe, his face, but she did not speak. he shifted
uncomfortably under the scrutiny, and avoided looking at her. he always tried
to give strangers as little chance to notice his eyes as he could manage.
finally he said, i was surprised to see one of the traveling people,
believing as you do.
it is possible to oppose evil without doing violence. her voice held the
simplicity of someone stating an obvious truth.
perrin grunted sourly, then immediately muttered an apology. would it
were as you say, mistress leya.
violence harms the doer as much as the victim, leya said placidly. that
is why we flee those who harm us, to save them from harm to themselves as
much for our own safety. if we do violence to oppose evil, soon we would be
no different from what we struggle against. it is with the strength of our belief
that we fight the shadow.


 perrin could not help snorting. mistress, i hope you never have to face
trollocs with the strength of your belief. the strength of their swords will cut
you down where you stand.
it is better to die than to she began, but anger made him speak right
over her. anger that she just would not see. anger that she really would die
rather than harm anyone, no matter how evil.
if you run, they will hunt you, and kill you, and eat your corpse. or they
might not wait till it is a corpse. either way, you are dead, and its evil that
has won. and there are men just as cruel. darkfriends and others. more others
than i would have believed even a year ago. let the whitecloaks decide you
tinkers dont walk in the light and see how many of you the strength of your
belief can keep alive.
she gave him a penetrating look. and yet you are not happy with your
weapons.
how did she know that? he shook his head irritably, shaggy hair swaying.
the creator made the world, he muttered, not i. i must live the best i can
in the world the way it is.
so sad for one so young, she said softly. why so sad?
i should be watching, not talking, he said curtly. you wont thank me if
i get you lost. he heeled stepper forward enough to cut off any further
conversation, but he could feel her looking at him. sad? im not sad, just. . . .
light, i dont know. there ought to be a better way, thats all. the itching
tickle came again at the back of his head, but absorbed in ignoring leyas
eyes on his back, he ignored that, too.
over the slope of the mountain and down they rode, across a forested
valley with a broad stream running cold along its bottom, kneedeep on the
horses. in the distance, the side of a mountain had been carved into the
semblance of two towering forms. a man and a woman, perrin thought they
might be, though wind and rain had long since made that uncertain. even
moiraine claimed to be unsure who they were supposed to be, or when the
granite had been cut.
pricklebacks and small trout darted away from the horses hooves, silver
flashes in the clear water. a deer raised its head from browsing, hesitated as
the party rode up out of the stream, then bounded off into the trees, and a
large mountain cat, gray striped and spotted with black, seemed to rise out of
the ground, frustrated in its stalk. it eyed the horses a moment, and with a lash
of its tail vanished after the deer. but there was little life visible in the


 mountains yet. only a handful of birds perched on limbs or pecked at the
ground where the snow had melted. more would return to the heights in a few
weeks, but not yet. they saw no other ravens.
it was late afternoon by the time perrin led them between two steepsloped
mountains, snowy peaks as ever wrapped in cloud, and turned up a smaller
stream that splashed downward over gray stones in a series of tiny waterfalls.
a bird called in the trees, and another answered it from ahead.
perrin smiled. bluefinch calls. a borderland bird. no one rode this way
without being seen. he rubbed his nose, and did not look at the tree the first
bird had called from.
their path narrowed as they rode up through scrubby leatherleaf and a few
gnarled mountain oaks. the ground level enough to ride beside the stream
became barely wider than a man on horseback, and the stream itself no more
than a tall man could step across.
perrin heard leya behind him, murmuring to herself. when he looked over
his shoulder, she was casting worried glances up the steep slopes to either
side. scattered trees perched precariously above them. it appeared impossible
they would not fall. the shienarans rode easily, at last beginning to relax.
abruptly a deep, oval bowl between the mountains opened out before them,
its sides steep but not nearly so precipitous as the narrow passage. the stream
rose from a small spring at its far end. perrins sharp eyes picked out a man
with the topknot of a shienaran, up in the limbs of an oak to his left. had a
redwinged jay called instead of a bluefinch, he would not have been alone,
and the way in would not have been so easy. a handful of men could hold that
passage against an army. if an army came, a handful would have to.
among the trees around the bowl stood log huts, not readily visible, so that
those gathered around the cook fires at the bottom of the bowl seemed at first
to be without shelter. there were fewer than a dozen in sight. and not many
more out of sight, perrin knew. most of them looked around at the sound of
horses, and some waved. the bowl seemed filled with the smells of men and
horses, of cooking and burning wood. a long white banner hung limply from
a tall pole near them. one form, at least half again as tall as anyone else, sat
on a log engrossed in a book that was small in his huge hands. that ones
attention never wavered, even when the only other person without a topknot
shouted, so you found her, did you? i thought youd be gone the night, this
time. it was a young womans voice, but she wore a boys coat and breeches
and had her hair cut short.


 a burst of wind swirled into the bowl, making cloaks flap and rippling the
banner out to its full length. for a moment the creature on it seemed to ride
the wind. a fourlegged serpent scaled in gold and scarlet, golden maned like
a lion, and its feet each tipped with five golden claws. a banner of legend. a
banner most men would not know if they saw it, but would fear when they
learned its name.
perrin waved a hand that took it all in as he led the way down into the
bowl. welcome to the camp of the dragon reborn, leya.


 c h a p t e r
2


saidin


face expressionless, the tuathaan woman stared at the banner as it drooped
again, then turned her attention to those around the fire. especially the one
reading, the one half again as tall as perrin and twice as big. you have an
ogier with you. i would not have thought. . . .she shook her head. where is
moiraine sedai? it seemed the dragon banner might as well not exist as far
as she was concerned.
perrin gestured toward the rough hut that stood furthest up the slope, at the
far end of the bowl. with walls and sloping roof of unpeeled logs, it was the
largest, though not very big at that. perhaps just barely large enough to be
called a cabin rather than a hut. that one is hers. hers and lans. he is her
warder. when you have had something hot to drink
no. i must speak to moiraine.
he was not surprised. all the women who came insisted on speaking to
moiraine immediately, and alone. the news that moiraine chose to share with
the rest of them did not always seem very important, but the women held the
intensity of a hunter stalking the last rabbit in the world for his starving
family. the halffrozen old beggar woman had refused blankets and a plate of
hot stew and tramped up to moiraines hut, barefoot in stillfalling snow.
leya slid from her saddle and handed the reins up to perrin. will you see
that she is fed? she patted the piebald mares nose. piesa is not used to
carrying me over such rugged country.
fodder is scarce, still, perrin told her, but shell have what we can give
her.
leya nodded, and went hurrying away up the slope without another word,


 holding her bright green skirts up, the blueembroidered red cloak swaying
behind her.
perrin swung down from his saddle, exchanging a few words with the men
who came from the fires to take the horses. he gave his bow to the one who
took stepper. no, except for one raven, they had seen nothing but the
mountains and the tuathaan woman. yes, the raven was dead. no, she had
told them nothing of what was happening outside the mountains. no, he had
no idea whether they would be leaving soon.
or ever, he added to himself. moiraine had kept them there all winter. the
shienarans did not think she gave the orders, not here, but perrin knew that
aes sedai somehow always seemed to get their way. especially moiraine.
once the horses were led away to the rude log stable, the riders went to
warm themselves. perrin tossed his cloak back over his shoulders and held his
hands out to the flames gratefully. the big kettle, baerlon work by the look of
it, gave off smells that had been making his mouth water for some time
already. someone had been lucky hunting today, it seemed, and lumpy roots
circled another fire close by, giving off an aroma faintly like turnips as they
roasted. he wrinkled his nose and concentrated on the stew. more and more
he wanted meat above anything else.
the woman in mens clothes was peering toward leya, who was just
disappearing into moiraines hut.
what do you see, min? he asked.
she came to stand beside him, her dark eyes troubled. he did not
understand why she insisted on breeches instead of skirts. perhaps it was
because he knew her, but he could not see how anyone could look at her and
see a toohandsome youth instead of a pretty young woman.
the tinker woman is going to die, she said softly, eyeing the others near
the fires. none was close enough to hear.
he was still, thinking of leyas gentle face. ah, light! tinkers never harm
anyone! he felt cold despite the warmth of the fire. burn me, i wish id never
asked. even the few aes sedai who knew of it did not understand what min
did. sometimes she saw images and auras surrounding people, and sometimes
she even knew what they meant.
masuto came to stir the stew with a long wood spoon. the shienaran eyed
them, then laid a finger alongside his long nose and grinned widely before he
left.


 blood and ashes! min muttered. hes probably decided we are
sweethearts murmuring to each other by the fire.
are you sure? perrin asked. she raised her eyebrows at him, and he
hastily added, about leya.
is that her name? i wish i didnt know. it always makes it worse, knowing
and not being able to. . . . perrin, i saw her own face floating over her
shoulder, covered in blood, eyes staring. its never any clearer than that. she
shivered and rubbed her hands together briskly. light, but i wish i saw more
happy things. all the happy things seem to have gone away.
he opened his mouth to suggest warning leya, then closed it again. there
was never any doubt about what min saw and knew, for good or bad. if she
was certain, it happened.
blood on her face, he muttered. does that mean shell die by violence?
he winced that he said it so easily. but what can i do? if i tell leya, if i make
her believe somehow, shell live her last days in fear, and it will change
nothing.
min gave a short nod.
if shes going to die by violence, it could mean an attack on the camp. but
there were scouts out every day, and guards set day and night. and moiraine
had the camp warded, so she said; no creature of the dark one would see it
unless he walked right into it. he thought of the wolves. no! the scouts
would find anyone or anything trying to approach the camp. its a long way
back to her people, he said half to himself. tinkers wouldnt have brought
their wagons any further than the foothills. anything could happen between
here and there.
min nodded sadly. and there arent enough of us to spare even one guard
for her. even if it would do any good.
she had told him; she had tried warning people about bad things when, at
six or seven, she had first realized not everyone could see what she saw. she
would not say more, but he had the impression that her warnings had only
made matters worse, when they were believed at all. it took some doing to
believe in mins viewings until you had proof.
when? he said. the word was cold in his ears, and hard as tool steel. i
cant do anything about leya, but maybe i can figure out whether were going
to be attacked.
as soon as the word was out of his mouth, she threw up her hands. she


 kept her voice down, though. it isnt like that. i can never tell when
something is going to happen. i only know it will, if i even know what i see
means. you dont understand. the seeing doesnt come when i want it to, and
neither does knowing. it just happens, and sometimes i know. something. a
little bit. it just happens. he tried to get a soothing word in, but she was
letting it all out in a flood he could not stem. i can see things around a man
one day and not the next, or the other way round. most of the time, i dont
see anything around anyone. aes sedai always have images around them, of
course, and warders, though its always harder to say what it means with
them than with anyone else. she gave perrin a searching look, half squinting.
a few others always do, too.
dont tell me what you see when you look at me, he said harshly, then
shrugged his heavy shoulders. even as a child he had been bigger than most
of the others, and he had quickly learned how easy it was to hurt people by
accident when you were bigger than they. it had made him cautious and
careful, and regretful of his anger when he let it show. i am sorry, min. i
shouldnt have snapped at you. i did not mean to hurt you.
she gave him a surprised look. you didnt hurt me. blessed few people
want to know what i see. the light knows, i would not, if it were someone
else who could do it. even the aes sedai had never heard of anyone else
who had her gift. gift was how they saw it, even if she did not.
its just that i wish there were something i could do about leya. i couldnt
stand it the way you do, knowing and not able to do anything.
strange, she said softly, how you seem to care so much about the
tuathaan. they are utterly peaceful, and i always see violence around
he turned his head away, and she cut off abruptly.
tuathaan? came a rumbling voice, like a huge bumblebee. what about
the tuathaan? the ogier came to join them at the fire, marking his place in
his book with a finger the size of a large sausage. a thin streamer of tabac
smoke rose from the pipe in his other hand. his highnecked coat of dark
brown wool buttoned up to the neck, and flared at the knee over turneddown
boot tops. perrin stood hardly as high as his chest.
loials face had frightened more than one person, with his nose broad
enough almost to be called a snout and his toowide mouth. his eyes were the
size of saucers, with thick eyebrows that dangled like mustaches almost to his
cheeks, and his ears poked up through long hair in tufted points. some who
had never seen an ogier took him for a trolloc, though trollocs were as much


 legend to most of them as ogier.
loials wide smile wavered and his eyes blinked as he became aware of
having interrupted them. perrin wondered how anyone could be frightened of
the ogier for long. yet some of the old stories call them fierce, and implacable
as enemies. he could not believe it. ogier were enemies to no one.
min told loial of leyas arrival, but not of what she had seen. she was
usually closemouthed about those seeings, especially when they were bad.
instead, she added, you should know how i feel, loial, suddenly caught up
by aes sedai and these two rivers folk.
loial made a noncommittal sound, but min seemed to take it for
agreement.
yes, she said emphatically. there i was, living my life in baerlon as i
liked it, when suddenly i was grabbed up by the scruff of the neck and jerked
off to the light knows where. well, i might as well have been. my life has not
been my own since i met moiraine. and these two rivers farmboys. she
rolled her eyes at perrin, a wry twist to her mouth. all i wanted was to live
as i pleased, fall in love with a man i chose. . . . her cheeks reddened
suddenly, and she cleared her throat. i mean to say, what is wrong with
wanting to live your life without all this upheaval?
taveren, loial began. perrin waved at him to stop, but the ogier could
seldom be slowed, much less stopped, when one of his enthusiasms had him
in its grip. he was accounted extremely hasty, by the ogier way of looking at
things. loial pushed his book into a coat pocket and went on, gesturing with
his pipe. all of us, all of our lives, affect the lives of others, min. as the
wheel of time weaves us into the pattern, the lifethread of each of us pulls
and tugs at the lifethreads around us. taveren are the same, only much,
much more so. they tug at the entire patternfor a time, at leastforcing it
to shape around them. the closer you are to them, the more you are affected
personally. its said that if you were in the same room with artur hawkwing,
you could feel the pattern rearranging itself. i dont know how true that is, but
ive read that it was. but it doesnt only work one way. taveren themselves
are woven to a tighter line than the rest of us, with fewer choices.
perrin grimaced. bloody few of the ones that matter.
min tossed her head. i just wish they didnt have to be so . . . so bloody
taveren all the time. taveren tugging on one side, and aes sedai meddling
on the other. what chance does a woman have?
loial shrugged. very little, i suppose, as long as she stays close to


 taveren.
as if i had a choice, min growled.
it was your good fortuneor misfortune, if you see it that wayto fall in
with not one, but three taveren. rand, mat, and perrin. i myself count it very
good fortune, and would even if they werent my friends. i think i might even.
. . . the ogier looked at them, suddenly shy, his ears twitching. promise
you will not laugh? i think i might write a book about it. i have been taking
notes.
min smiled, a friendly smile, and loials ears pricked back up again.
thats wonderful, she told him. but some of us feel as if were being
danced about like puppets by these taveren.
i didnt ask for it, perrin burst out. i did not ask for it.
she ignored him. is that what happened to you, loial? is that why you
travel with moiraine? i know you ogier almost never leave your stedding.
did one of these taveren tug you along with him?
loial became engrossed in a study of his pipe. i just wanted to see the
groves the ogier planted, he muttered. just to see the groves. he glanced
at perrin as if asking for help, but perrin only grinned.
lets see how the shoe nails onto your hoof. he did not know all of it, but
he did know loial had run away. he was ninety years old, but not yet old
enough by ogier standards to leave the steddinggoing outside, they called
itwithout the permission of the elders. ogier lived a very long time, as
humans saw things. loial said the elders would not be best pleased when they
put their hands on him again. he seemed intent on putting that moment off as
long as possible.
there was a stir among the shienarans, men getting to their feet. rand was
coming out of moiraines hut.
even at that distance perrin could make him out clearly, a young man with
reddish hair and gray eyes. he was of an age with perrin, and would stand
half a head taller if they were side by side, though rand was more slender, if
still broad across the shoulders. embroidered golden thorns ran up the sleeves
of his highcollared, red coat, and on the breast of his dark cloak stood the
same creature as on the banner, the fourlegged serpent with the golden mane.
rand and he had grown up together as friends. are we still friends? can we
be? now?
the shienarans bowed as one, heads held up but hands to knees. lord


 dragon, uno called, we stand ready. honor to serve.
uno, who could hardly say a sentence without a curse, spoke now with the
deepest respect. the others echoed him. honor to serve. masema, who saw
ill in everything, and whose eyes now shone with utter devotion; ragan; all of
them, awaiting a command if it were rands pleasure to give one.
from the slope rand stared down at them a moment, then turned and
disappeared into the trees.
he has been arguing with moiraine again, min said quietly. all day, this
time.
perrin was not surprised, yet he still felt a small shock. arguing with an
aes sedai. all the childhood tales came back to him. aes sedai, who made
thrones and nations dance to their hidden strings. aes sedai, whose gift
always had a hook in it, whose price was always smaller than you could
believe, yet always turned out to be greater than you could imagine. aes
sedai, whose anger could break the ground and summon lightning. some of
the stories were untrue, he knew now. and at the same time, they did not tell
the half.
i had better go to him, he said. after they argue, he always needs
someone to talk to. and aside from moiraine and lan, there were only the
three of themmin, loial, and himwho did not stare at rand as if he stood
above kings. and of the three only perrin knew him from before.
he strode up the slope, pausing only to glance at the closed door of
moiraines hut. leya would be in there, and lan. the warder seldom let
himself get far from the aes sedais side.
rands much smaller hut was a little lower down, well hidden in the trees,
away from all the rest. he had tried living down among the other men, but
their constant awe drove him off. he kept to himself, now. too much to
himself, to perrins thinking. but he knew rand was not headed to his hut
now.
perrin hurried on to where one side of the bowlshaped valley suddenly
became sheer cliff, fifty paces high and smooth except for tough brush
clinging tenaciously here and there. he knew exactly where a crack in the
gray rock wall lay, an opening hardly wider than his shoulders. with only a
ribbon of lateafternoon light overhead, it was like walking down a tunnel.
half a mile the crack ran, abruptly opening out into a narrow vale, less than
a mile long, its floor covered with rocks and boulders, and even the steep


 slopes were thickly forested with tall leatherleaf and pine and fir. long
shadows stretched away from the sun sitting on the mountaintops. the walls
of this place were unbroken save for the crack, and as steep as if a giant axe
had buried itself in the mountains. it could be even more easily defended by a
few than the bowl, but it had neither stream nor spring. no one went there.
except rand, after he argued with moiraine.
rand stood not far from the entrance, leaning against the rough trunk of a
leatherleaf, staring at the palms of his hands. perrin knew that on each there
was a heron, branded into the flesh. rand did not move when perrins boot
scraped on stone.
suddenly rand began to recite softly, never looking up from his hands.
twice and twice shall he be marked,
twice to live, and twice to die.
once the heron, to set his path.
twice the heron, to name him true.
once the dragon, for remembrance lost.
twice the dragon, for the price he must pay.
with a shudder he tucked his hands under his arms. but no dragons, yet.
he chuckled roughly. not yet.
for a moment perrin simply looked at him. a man who could channel the
one power. a man doomed to go mad from the taint on saidin, the male half
of the true source, and certain to destroy everything around him in his
madness. a mana thing!everyone was taught to loathe and fear from
childhood. only . . . it was hard to stop seeing the boy he had grown up with.
how do you just stop being somebodys friend? perrin chose a small boulder
with a flat top, and sat, waiting.
after a while rand turned his head to look at him. do you think mat is all
right? he looked so sick, the last i saw him.
he must be all right by now. he should be in tar valon, by now. theyll
heal him, there. and nynaeve and egwene will keep him out of trouble.
egwene and nynaeve, rand and mat and perrin. all five from emonds field
in the two rivers. few people had come into the two rivers from outside,
except for occasional peddlers, and merchants once a year to buy wool and
tabac. almost no one had ever left. until the wheel chose out its taveren,


 and five simple country folk could stay where they were no longer. could be
what they had been no longer.
rand nodded and was silent.
lately, perrin said, i find myself wishing i was still a blacksmith. do
you. . . . do you wish you were still just a shepherd?
duty, rand muttered. death is lighter than a feather, duty heavier than a
mountain. thats what they say in shienar. the dark one is stirring. the
last battle is coming. and the dragon reborn has to face the dark one in the
last battle, or the shadow will cover everything. the wheel of time broken.
every age remade in the dark ones image. theres only me. he began to
laugh mirthlessly, his shoulders shaking. i have the duty, because there isnt
anybody else, now is there?
perrin shifted uneasily. the laughter had a raw edge that made his skin
crawl. i understand you were arguing with moiraine again. the same thing?
rand drew a deep, ragged breath. dont we always argue about the same
thing? theyre down there, on almoth plain, and the light alone knows
where else. hundreds of them. thousands. they declared for the dragon
reborn because i raised that banner. because i let myself be called the
dragon. because i could see no other choice. and theyre dying. fighting,
searching, and praying for the man who is supposed to lead them. dying. and
i sit here safe in the mountains all winter. i . . . i owe them . . . something.
you think i like it? perrin swung his head in irritation.
you take whatever she says to you, rand grated. you never stand up to
her.
much good it has done you, standing up to her. you have argued all
winter, and we have sat here like lumps all winter.
because she is right. rand laughed again, that chilling laugh. the light
burn me, she is right. they are all split up into little groups all over the plain,
all across tarabon and arad doman. if i join any one of them, the
whitecloaks and the domani army and the taraboners will be on top of them
like a duck on a beetle.
perrin almost laughed himself, in confusion. if you agree with her, why in
the light do you argue all the time?
because i have to do something. or ill . . . illburst like a rotted
melon!


 do what? if you listen to what she says
rand gave him no chance to say they would sit there forever. moiraine
says! moiraine says! rand jerked erect, squeezing his head between his
hands. moiraine has something to say about everything! moiraine says i
mustnt go to the men who are dying in my name. moiraine says ill know
what to do next because the pattern will force me to it. moiraine says! but she
never says how ill know. oh, no! she doesnt know that. his hands fell to
his sides, and he turned toward perrin, head tilted and eyes narrowed.
sometimes i feel as if moiraine is putting me through my paces like a fancy
tairen stallion doing his steps. do you ever feel that?
perrin scrubbed a hand through his shaggy hair. i. . . . whatever is pushing
us, or pulling us, i know who the enemy is, rand.
baalzamon, rand said softly. an ancient name for the dark one. in the
trolloc tongue, it meant heart of the dark. and i must face him, perrin. his
eyes closed in a grimace, half smile, half pain. light help me, half the time i
want it to happen now, to be over and done with, and the other half. . . . how
many times can i manage to. . . . light, it pulls at me so. what if i cant. . . .
what if i. . . . the ground trembled.
rand? perrin said worriedly.
rand shivered; despite the chill, there was sweat on his face. his eyes were
still shut tight. oh, light, he groaned, it pulls so.
suddenly the ground heaved beneath perrin, and the valley echoed with a
vast rumble. it seemed as if the ground was jerked out from under his feet. he
fellor the earth leaped up to meet him. the valley shook as though a vast
hand had reached down from the sky to wrench it out of the land. he clung to
the ground while it tried to bounce him like a ball. pebbles in front of his eyes
leaped and tumbled, and dust rose in waves.
rand! his bellow was lost in the grumbling roar.
rand stood with his head thrown back, his eyes still shut tight. he did not
seem to feel the thrashing of the ground that had him now at one angle, now
at another. his balance never shifted, no matter how he was tossed. perrin
could not be certain, being shaken as he was, but he thought rand wore a sad
smile. the trees flailed about, and the leatherleaf suddenly cracked in two, the
greater part of its trunk crashing down not three paces from rand. he noticed
it no more than he noticed any of the rest.
perrin struggled to fill his lungs. rand! for the love of the light, rand!


 stop it!
as abruptly as it had begun, it was done. a weakened branch cracked off of
a stunted oak with a loud snap. perrin got to his feet slowly, coughing. dust
hung in the air, sparkling motes in the rays of the setting sun.
rand was staring at nothing, now, chest heaving as if he had run ten miles.
this had never happened before, nor anything remotely like it.
rand, perrin said carefully, what?
rand still seemed to be looking into a far distance. it is always there.
calling to me. pulling at me. saidin. the male half of the true source.
sometimes i cant stop myself from reaching out for it. he made a motion of
plucking something out of the air, and transferred his stare to his closed fist.
i can feel the taint even before i touch it. the dark ones taint, like a thin
coat of vileness trying to hide the light. it turns my stomach, but i cannot
help myself. i cannot! only sometimes, i reach out, and its like trying to
catch air. his empty hand sprang open, and he gave a bitter laugh. what if
that happens when the last battle comes? what if i reach out and catch
nothing?
well, you caught something that time, perrin said hoarsely. what were
you doing?
rand looked around as if seeing things for the first time. the fallen
leatherleaf, and the broken branches. there was, perrin realized, surprisingly
little damage. he had expected gaping rents in the earth. the wall of trees
looked almost whole.
i did not mean to do this. it was as if i tried to open a tap, and instead
pulled the whole tap out of the barrel. it . . . filled me. i had to send it
somewhere before it burned me up, but i . . . i did not mean this.
perrin shook his head. what use to tell him to try not to do it again? he
barely knows more about what hes doing than i do. he contented himself
with, there are enough who want you deadand the rest of uswithout
you doing the job for them. rand did not seem to be listening. we had best
get on back to the camp. it will be dark soon, and i dont know about you, but
i am hungry.
what? oh. you go on, perrin. i will be along. i want to be alone again a
while.
perrin hesitated, then turned reluctantly toward the crack in the valley wall.
he stopped when rand spoke again.


 do you have dreams when you sleep? good dreams?
sometimes, perrin said warily. i dont remember much of what i
dream. he had learned to set guards on his dreaming.
theyre always there, dreams, rand said, so softly perrin barely heard.
maybe they tell us things. true things. he fell silent, brooding.
suppers waiting, perrin said, but rand was deep in his own thoughts.
finally perrin turned and left him standing there.


 c h a p t e r
3


news from the plain


darkness shrouded part of the crack, for in one place the tremors had
collapsed a part of the wall against the other side, high up. he stared up at the
blackness warily before hurrying underneath, but the slab of stone seemed to
be solidly wedged in place. the itch had returned to the back of his head,
stronger than before. no, burn me! no! it went away.
when he came out above the camp, the bowl was filled with odd shadows
from the sinking sun. moiraine was standing outside her hut, peering up at the
crack. he stopped short. she was a slender, darkhaired woman no taller than
his shoulder, and pretty, with the ageless quality of all aes sedai who had
worked with the one power for a time. he could not put any age at all to her,
with her face too smooth for many years and her dark eyes too wise for youth.
her dress of deep blue silk was disarrayed and dusty, and wisps stuck out in
her usually wellordered hair. a smudge of dust lay across her face.
he dropped his eyes. she knew about himshe and lan alone, of those in
the campand he did not like the knowing in her face when she looked into
his eyes. yellow eyes. someday, perhaps, he could bring himself to ask her
what she knew. an aes sedai must know more of it than he did. but this was
not the time. there never seemed to be a time. he. . . . he didnt mean. . . . it
was an accident.
an accident, she said in a flat voice, then shook her head and vanished
back inside the hut. the door banged shut a little loudly.
perrin drew a deep breath and continued on down toward the cook fires.
there would be another argument between rand and the aes sedai, in the
morning if not tonight.


 half a dozen trees lay toppled on the slopes of the bowl, roots ripped out of
the earth in arcs of soil. a trail of scrapes and churned ground led down to the
streamside and a boulder that had not been there before. one of the huts up
the opposite slope had collapsed in the tremors, and most of the shienarans
were gathered around it, rebuilding it. loial was with them. the ogier could
pick up a log it would take four men to lift. unos curses occasionally drifted
down.
min stood by the fires, stirring a kettle with a disgruntled expression. there
was a small bruise on her cheek, and a faint smell of burned stew hung in the
air. i hate cooking, she announced, and peered doubtfully into the kettle. if
something goes wrong with it, it isnt my fault. rand spilled half of it on the
fire with his. . . . what right does he have to bounce us around like sacks of
grain? she rubbed the seat of her breeches and winced. when i get my
hands on him, ill thump him so he never forgets. she waved the wooden
spoon at perrin as if she intended to start the thumping with him.
was anyone hurt?
only if you count bruises, min said grimly. they were upset, all right, at
first. then they saw moiraine staring off toward rands hideyhole, and
decided it was his work. if the dragon wants to shake the mountain down on
our heads, then the dragon must have a good reason for it. if he decided to
make them take off their skins and dance in their bones, they would think it
all right. she snorted and rapped the spoon on the edge of the kettle.
he looked back toward moiraines hut. if leya had been hurtif she were
deadthe aes sedai would not simply have gone back inside. the sense of
waiting was still there. whatever it is, it hasnt happened yet. min, maybe
you had better go. first thing in the morning. i have some silver i can let you
have, and im sure moiraine would give you enough to take passage with a
merchants train out of ghealdan. you could be back in baerlon before you
know it.
she looked at him until he began to wonder if he had said something
wrong. finally, she said, that is very sweet of you, perrin. but, no.
i thought you wanted to go. youre always carrying on about having to
stay here.
i knew an old illianer woman; once, she said slowly. when she was
young, her mother arranged a marriage for her with a man she had never even
met. they do that down in illian, sometimes. she said she spent the first five
years raging against him, and the next five scheming to make his life


 miserable without his knowing who was to blame. it was only years later, she
said, when he died, that she realized he really had been the love of her life.
i dont see what that has to do with this.
her look said he obviously was not trying to understand, and her voice
became overly patient. just because fate has chosen something for you
instead of you choosing it for yourself doesnt mean it has to be bad. even if
its something you are sure you would never have chosen in a hundred years.
better ten days of love than years of regretting,  she quoted.
i understand that even less, he told her. you dont have to stay if you
dont want to.
she hung the spoon on a tall forked stick stuck in the ground, then
surprised him by rising on tiptoe to kiss his cheek. you are a very nice man,
perrin aybara. even if you dont understand anything.
perrin blinked at her uncertainly. he wished that he could be certain rand
was in his right mind, or that mat were there. he was never sure of his ground
with girls, but rand always seemed to know his way. so did mat; most of the
girls back home in emonds field had sniffed that mat would never grow up,
but he had seemed to have a way with them.
what about you, perrin? dont you ever want to go home?
all the time, he said fervently. but i . . . i do not think i can. not yet.
he looked off toward rands vale. we are tied together, it seems, arent we,
rand? maybe not ever. he thought he had said that too softly for her to
hear, but the look she gave him was full of sympathy. and agreement.
his ears caught faint footsteps behind him, and he looked back up toward
moiraines hut. two shapes were making their way down through the
deepening twilight, one a woman, slender and graceful even on the rough,
slanting ground. the man, head and shoulders taller than his companion,
turned off toward where the shienarans were working. even to perrins eyes
he was indistinct, sometimes seeming to vanish altogether, then reappear in
midstride, parts of him fading into the night and fading back as the wind
gusted. only a warders shifting cloak could do that, which made the larger
figure lan, just as the smaller was certainly moiraine.
well behind them, another shape, even dimmer, slipped between the trees.
rand, perrin thought, going back to his hut. another night when he wont eat
because he cant stand the way everybody looks at him.
you must have eyes in the back of your head, min said, frowning toward


 the approaching woman. or else the sharpest ears i have ever heard of. is
that moiraine?
careless. he had grown so used to the shienarans knowing how well he
could seein daylight at least; they did not know about the nightthat he
was beginning to slip about other things. carelessness might kill me yet.
is the tuathaan woman all right? min asked as moiraine came to the
fire.
she is resting. the aes sedais low voice had its usual musical quality, as
if speaking were halfway to singing, and her hair and clothes were back in
perfect order again. she rubbed her hands over the fire. there was a golden
ring on her left hand, a serpent biting its own tail. the great serpent, an even
older symbol for eternity than the wheel of time. every woman trained in
tar valon wore such a ring.
for a moment moiraines gaze rested on perrin, and seemed to penetrate
too deeply. she fell and split her scalp when rand. . . . her mouth
tightened, but in the next instant her face was utter calm again. i healed her,
and she is sleeping. there is always a good deal of blood with even a minor
scalp wound, but it was not serious. did you see anything about her, min?
min looked uncertain. i saw. . . . i thought i saw her death. her own face,
all over blood. i was sure i knew what it meant, but if she split her scalp. . . .
are you sure she is all right? it was a measure of her discomfort that she
asked. an aes sedai did not heal and leave anything wrong that could be
healed. and moiraines talents were particularly strong in that area.
min sounded so troubled that perrin was surprised for a moment. then he
nodded to himself. she did not really like doing what she did, but it was a part
of her; she thought she knew how it worked, or some of it, at least. if she was
wrong, it would almost be like finding out she did not know how to use her
own hands.
moiraine considered her for a moment, serene and dispassionate. you
have never been wrong in any reading for me, not one about which i had any
way of knowing. perhaps this is the first time.
when i know, i know, min whispered obstinately. light help me, i do.
or perhaps it is yet to come. she has a long way yet to travel, to return to
her wagons, and she must ride through unsettled lands.
the aes sedais voice was a cool song, uncaring. perrin made an
involuntary sound in his throat. light, did i sound like that? i wont let a death


 matter that little to me.
as if he had spoken aloud, moiraine looked at him. the wheel weaves as
the wheel wills, perrin. i told you long ago that we were in a war. we cannot
stop just because some of us may die. any of us may die before it is done.
leyas weapons may not be the same as yours, but she knew that when she
became part of it.
perrin dropped his eyes. thats as may be, aes sedai, but i will never
accept it the way you do.
lan joined them across the fire, with uno and loial. the flames cast
flickering shadows across the warders face, making it seem more carved
from stone even than it normally did, all hard planes and angles. his cloak
was not much easier to look at in the firelight. sometimes it seemed only a
dark gray cloak, or black, but the gray and black appeared to crawl and
change if you looked too closely, shades and shadows sliding across it,
soaking into it. other times, it looked as if lan had somehow made a hole in
the night and pulled darkness round his shoulders. not at all an easy thing to
watch, and not made any easier by the man who wore it.
lan was tall and hard, broadshouldered, with blue eyes like frozen
mountain lakes, and he moved with a deadly grace that made the sword on his
hip seem a part of him. it was not that he seemed merely capable of violence
and death; this man had tamed violence and death and kept them in his
pocket, ready to be loosed in a heartbeat, or embraced, should moiraine give
the word. beside lan, even uno appeared less dangerous. there was a touch
of gray in the warders long hair, held back by a woven leather cord around
his forehead, but younger men stepped back from confronting lanif they
were wise.
mistress leya has the usual news from almoth plain, moiraine said.
everyone fighting everyone else. villages burned. people fleeing in every
direction. and hunters have appeared on the plain, searching for the horn of
valere. perrin shiftedthe horn was where no hunter on almoth plain
would find it; where he hoped no hunter ever would find itand she gave
him a cool look before continuing. she did not like any of them to speak of
the horn. except when she chose to, of course.
she brought different news, as well. the whitecloaks have perhaps five
thousand men on almoth plain.
uno grunted. thats flaminuh, pardon, aes sedai. that must be half
their strength. theyve never committed so much to one place before.


 then i suppose all those who declared for rand are dead or scattered,
perrin muttered. or they soon will be. you were right, moiraine. he did not
like the thought of whitecloaks. he did not like the children of the light at
all.
that is what is odd, moiraine said. or the first part of it. the children
have announced that their purpose is to bring peace, which is not unusual for
them. what is unusual is that while they are trying to force the taraboners and
the domani back across their respective borders, they have not moved in any
force against those who have declared for the dragon.
min gave an exclamation of surprise. is she certain? that does not sound
like any whitecloaks i ever heard of.
there cant be many blooduhmany tinkers left on the plain, uno
said. his voice creaked from the strain of watching his language in front of an
aes sedai. his real eye matched the frown of the painted one. they dont
like to stay where theres any kind of trouble, especially fighting. there cant
be enough of them to see everywhere.
there are enough for my purposes, moiraine said firmly. most have
gone, but some few remained because i asked them to. and leya is quite
certain. oh, the children have snapped up some of the dragonsworn, where
there were only a handful gathered. but though they proclaim they will bring
down this false dragon, though they have a thousand men supposedly doing
nothing but hunting him, they avoid contact with any party of as many as fifty
dragonsworn. not openly, you understand, but there is always some delay,
something that allows those they chase to slip away.
then rand can go down to them as he wants. loial blinked uncertainly
at the aes sedai. the whole camp knew of her arguments with rand. the
wheel weaves a way for him.
uno and lan opened their mouths at the same time, but the shienaran gave
way with a small bow. more likely, the warder said, it is some whitecloak
plot, though the light burn me if i can see what it is. but when the
whitecloaks give me a gift, i search for the poisoned needle hidden in it.
uno nodded grimly. besides which, lan added, the domani and the
taraboners are still trying as hard to kill the dragonsworn as they are to kill
each other.
and there is another thing, moiraine said. three young men have died
in villages mistress leyas wagons passed near. perrin noticed a flicker of
lans eyelid; for the warder, it was as much a sign of surprise as a shout from


 another man. lan had not expected her to tell this. moiraine went on. one
died by poison, two by the knife. each in circumstances where no one should
have been able to come close unseen, but that is how it happened. she
peered into the flames. all three young men were taller than most, and had
lightcolored eyes. light eyes are uncommon on almoth plain, but i think it is
very unlucky right now to be a tall young man with light eyes there.
how? perrin asked. how could they be killed if no one could get close
to them?
the dark one has killers you dont notice until it is too late, lan said
quietly.
uno gave a shiver. the soulless. i never heard of one south of the
borderlands before.
enough of such talk, moiraine said firmly.
perrin had questionswhat in the light are the soulless? are they like a
trolloc, or a fade? what?but he left them unasked. when moiraine
decided enough had been said about something, she would not talk of it
anymore. and when she shut her mouth, you could not pry lans open with
an iron bar. the shienarans followed her lead, too. no one wanted to anger an
aes sedai.
light! min muttered, uneasily eyeing the deepening darkness around
them. you dont notice them? light!
so nothing has changed, perrin said glumly. not really. we cannot go
down to the plain, and the dark one wants us dead.
everything changes, moiraine said calmly, and the pattern takes it all in.
we must ride on the pattern, not on the changes of a moment. she looked at
them each in turn, then said, uno, are you certain your scouts missed nothing
suspicious? even something small?
the lord dragons rebirth has loosed the bonds of certainty, moiraine
sedai, and there is never certainty if you fight myrddraal, but i will stake my
life that the scouts did as good a job as any warder. it was one of the longest
speeches perrin had ever heard out of uno without any curses. there was
sweat on the mans forehead from the effort.
we all may, moiraine said. what rand did might as well have been a
fire on the mountaintop for any myrddraal within ten miles.
maybe . . . min began hesitantly. maybe you ought to set wards that


 will keep them out. lan gave her a hard stare. he sometimes questioned
moiraines decisions himself, though he seldom did so where anyone could
overhear, but he did not approve of others doing the same. min frowned right
back at him. well, myrddraal and trollocs are bad enough, but at least i can
see them. i dont like the idea that one of these . . . these soulless might sneak
in here and slit my throat before i even noticed him.
the wards i set will hide us from the soulless as well as from any other
shadowspawn, moiraine said. when you are weak, as we are, the best
choice is often to hide. if there is a halfman close enough to have. . . . well,
to set wards that would kill them if they tried to enter camp is beyond my
abilities, and even if i could, such a warding would only pen us here. since it
is not possible to set two kinds of warding at once, i leave the scouts and the
guardsand lanto defend us, and use the one warding that may do some
good.
i could make a circuit around the camp, lan said. if there is anything
out there that the scouts missed, i will find it. it was not a boast, just a
statement of fact. uno even nodded agreement.
moiraine shook her head. if you are needed tonight, my gaidin, it will be
here. her gaze rose toward the dark mountains around them. there is a
feeling in the air.
waiting. the word left perrins tongue before he could stop it. when
moiraine looked at himinto himhe wished he had it back.
yes, she said. waiting. make sure your guards are especially alert
tonight, uno. there was no need to suggest that the men sleep with their
weapons close at hand; shienarans always did that. sleep well, she added to
them all, as if there were any chance of that now, and started back for her hut.
lan stayed long enough to spoon up three dishes of stew, then hurried after
her, quickly swallowed by the night.
perrins eyes shone golden as they followed the warder through the
darkness. sleep well, he muttered. the smell of cooked meat suddenly
made him queasy. i have the third watch, uno? the shienaran nodded.
then i will try to take her advice. others were coming to the fires, and
murmurs of conversation followed him up the slope.
he had a hut to himself, a small thing of logs barely tall enough to stand in,
the chinks filled with dried mud. a rough bed, padded with pine boughs
beneath a blanket, took up nearly half of it. whoever had unsaddled his horse
had also propped his bow just inside the door. he hung up his belt, with axe


 and quiver, on a peg, then stripped down to his smallclothes, shivering. the
nights were cold still, but cold kept him from sleeping too deeply. in deep
sleep, dreams came that he could not shake off.
for a time, with a single blanket over him, he lay staring at the log roof,
shivering. then sleep came, and with it, dreams.


 c h a p t e r
4


shadows sleeping


cold filled the common room of the inn despite the fire blazing on the long,
stone hearth. perrin rubbed his hands before the flames, but he could get no
warmth in them. there was an odd comfort in the cold, though, as if it were a
shield. a shield against what, he could not think. something murmured in the
back of his mind, a dim sound only vaguely heard, scratching to get in.
so you will give it up, then. it is the best thing for you. come. sit, and we
will talk.
perrin turned to look at the speaker. the round tables scattered about the
room were empty except for the lone man seated in a corner, in the shadows.
the rest of the room seemed in some way hazy, almost an impression rather
than a place, especially anything he was not looking at directly. he glanced
back at the fire; it burned on a brick hearth, now. somehow, none of it
bothered him. it should. but he could not have said why.
the man beckoned, and perrin walked closer to his table. a square table.
the tables were square. frowning, he reached out to finger the tabletop, but
pulled his hand back. there were no lamps in that corner of the room, and
despite the light elsewhere, the man and his table were almost hidden, nearly
blended with the dimness.
perrin had a feeling that he knew the man, but it was as vague as what he
saw out of the corner of his eye. the fellow was in his middle years,
handsome and too well dressed for a country inn, in dark, nearly black,
velvets with white lace falls at his collar and cuffs. he sat stiffly, sometimes
pressing a hand to his chest, as if moving hurt him. his dark eyes were fixed
on perrins face; they appeared like glistening points in the shadows.


 give up what? perrin asked.
that, of course. the man nodded to the axe at perrins waist. he sounded
surprised, as if it were a conversation they had had before, an old argument
taken up again.
perrin had not realized the axe was there, had not felt the weight of it
pulling at his belt. he ran a hand over the halfmoon blade and the thick spike
that balanced it. the steel feltsolid. more solid than anything else there.
maybe even more solid than he was himself. he kept his hand there, to hold
onto something real.
i have thought of it, he said, but i do not think i can. not yet. not yet?
the inn seemed to flicker, and the murmur sounded again in his head. no!
the murmur faded.
no? the man smiled, a cold smile. you are a blacksmith, boy. and a
good one, from what i hear. your hands were made for a hammer, not an axe.
made to make things, not to kill. go back to that before it is too late.
perrin found himself nodding. yes. but im taveren. he had never said
that out loud before. but he knows it already. he was sure of that, though he
could not say why.
for an instant the mans smile became a grimace, but then it returned in
more strength than before. a cold strength. there are ways to change things,
boy. ways to avoid even fate. sit, and we will talk of them. the shadows
appeared to shift and thicken, to reach out.
perrin took a step back, keeping well in the light. i dont think so.
at least have a drink with me. to years past and years to come. here, you
will see things more clearly after. the cup the man pushed across the table
had not been there a moment before. it shone bright silver, and dark, bloodred wine filled it to the brim.
perrin peered at the mans face. even to his sharp eyes, the shadows
seemed to shroud the other mans features like a warders cloak. darkness
molded the man like a caress. there was something about the mans eyes,
something he thought he could remember if he tried hard enough. the
murmur returned.
no, he said. he spoke to the soft sound inside his head, but when the
mans mouth tightened in anger, a flash of rage suppressed as soon as begun,
he decided it would do for the wine as well. i am not thirsty.


 he turned and started for the door. the fireplace was rounded river stones;
a few long tables lined by benches filled the room. he suddenly wanted to be
outside, anywhere away from this man.
you will not have many chances, the man said behind him in a hard
voice. three threads woven together share one anothers doom. when one is
cut, all are. fate can kill you, if it does not do worse.
perrin felt a sudden heat against his back, rising then fading just as quickly,
as if the doors of a huge smelting furnace had swung open and closed again.
startled, he turned back to the room. it was empty.
only a dream, he thought, shivering from the cold, and with that everything
shifted.
he stared into the mirror, a part of him not comprehending what he saw,
another part accepting. a gilded helmet, worked like a lions head, sat on his
head as if it belonged there. gold leaf covered his ornately hammered
breastplate, and goldwork embellished the plate and mail on his arms and
legs. only the axe at his side was plain. a voicehis ownwhispered in his
mind that he would take it over any other weapon, had carried it a thousand
times, in a hundred battles. no! he wanted to take it off, throw it away. i
cant! there was a sound in his head, louder than a murmur, almost at the
level of understanding.
a man destined for glory.
he spun away from the mirror and found himself staring at the most
beautiful woman he had ever seen. he noticed nothing else about the room,
cared to see nothing but her. her eyes were pools of midnight, her skin
creamy pale and surely softer, more smooth than her dress of white silk.
when she moved toward him, his mouth went dry. he realized that every
other woman he had ever seen was clumsy and illshaped. he shivered, and
wondered why he felt cold.
a man should grasp his destiny with both hands, she said, smiling. it was
almost enough to warm him, that smile. she was tall, less than a hand short of
being able to look him in the eyes. silver combs held hair darker than a
ravens wing. a broad belt of silver links banded a waist he could have
encircled with his hands.
yes, he whispered. inside him, startlement fought with acceptance. he
had no use for glory. but when she said it, he wanted nothing else. i mean.
. . . the murmuring sound dug at his skull. no! it was gone, and for a
moment, so was acceptance. almost. he put a hand to his head, touched the


 golden helmet, took it off. i . . . i dont think i want this. it is not mine.
dont want it? she laughed. what man with blood in his veins would
not want glory? as much glory as if you had sounded the horn of valere.
i dont, he said, though a piece of him shouted that he lied. the horn of
valere. the horn rang out, and the wild charge began. death rode at his
shoulder, and yet she waited ahead, too. his lover. his destroyer. no! i am a
blacksmith.
her smile was pitying. such a little thing to want. you must not listen to
those who would try to turn you from your destiny. they would demean you,
debase you. destroy you. fighting fate can only bring pain. why choose pain,
when you can have glory? when your name can be remembered alongside all
the heroes of legend?
i am no hero.
you dont know the half of what you are. of what you can be. come,
share a cup with me, to destiny and glory. there was a shining silver cup in
her hand, filled with bloodred wine. drink.
he stared at the cup, frowning. there was something . . . familiar about it.
a growling chewed at his brain. no! he fought away from it, refusing to
listen. no!
she held out the golden cup to him. drink.
golden? i thought the cup was. . . . it was. . . . the rest of the thought
would not come. but in his confusion the sound came again, inside, gnawing,
demanding to be heard. no, he said. no! he looked at the golden helmet
in his hands and threw it aside. i am a blacksmith. i am. . . . the sound
within his head fought him, struggling toward being heard. he wrapped his
arms around his head to shut it out, and only shut it in. iamaman! he
shouted.
darkness enfolded him, but her voice followed, whispering. the night is
always there, and dreams come to all men. especially you, my wildling. and i
will always be in your dreams.
stillness.
he lowered his arms. he was back in his own coat and breeches again,
sturdy and well made, if plain. suitable garb for a blacksmith, or any country
man. yet he barely noticed them.
he stood on a lowrailed bridge of stone, arching from one wide, flat


 topped stone spire to another, spires that rose from depths too far for even his
eyes to penetrate. the light would have been dim to any other eyes, and he
could not make out from where it came. it just was. everywhere he looked,
left and right, up or down, were more bridges, more spires, and railless ramps.
there seemed no end to them, no pattern. worse, some of those ramps
climbed to spire tops that had to be directly above the ones they had left.
splashing water echoed, the sound seeming to come from everywhere at once.
he shivered with cold.
suddenly, from the corner of his eye, he caught a motion, and without
thinking, he crouched behind the stone railing. there was danger in being
seen. he did not know why, but he knew it was true. he just knew.
cautiously peering over the top of the rail, he sought what he had seen
moving. a flash of white flickered on a distant ramp. a woman, he was sure,
though he could not quite make her out. a woman in a white dress, hurrying
somewhere.
on a bridge slightly below him, and much closer than the ramp where the
woman had been, a man suddenly appeared, tall and dark and slender, the
silver in his black hair giving him a distinguished look, his dark green coat
thickly embroidered with golden leaves. goldwork covered his belt and
pouch, and gems sparkled on his dagger sheath, and golden fringe encircled
his boot tops. where had he come from?
another man started across the bridge from the other side, his appearance
as sudden as the first mans. black stripes ran down the puffy sleeves of his
red coat, and pale lace hung thick at his collar and cuffs. his boots were so
worked with silver that it was hard to see the leather. he was shorter than the
man he went to meet, more stocky, with closecropped hair as white as his
lace. age did not make him frail, though. he strode with the same arrogant
strength the other man showed.
the two of them approached each other warily. like two horse traders who
know the other fellow has a spavined mare to sell, perrin thought.
the men began to talk. perrin strained his ears, but he could not hear so
much as a murmur above the splashing echoes. frowns, and glares, and sharp
motions as if half on the point of striking. they did not trust one another. he
thought they might even hate each other.
he glanced up, searching for the woman, but she was gone. when he
looked back down, another man had joined the first two. and somehow, from
somewhere, perrin knew him with the vagueness of an old memory. a


 handsome man in his middle years, wearing nearly black velvet and white
lace. an inn, perrin thought. and something before that. something. . . .
something a long time ago, it seemed. but the memory would not come.
the first two men stood side by side, now, made uncomfortable allies by
the presence of the newcomer. he shouted at them and shook his fist, while
they shifted uneasily, refusing to meet his glares. if the two hated each other,
they feared him more.
his eyes, perrin thought. what is strange about his eyes?
the tall, dark man began to argue back, slowly at first, then with increasing
fervor. the whitehaired man joined in, and suddenly their temporary alliance
broke. all three shouted at once, each at both of the others in turn. abruptly
the man in dark velvets threw his arms wide, as if demanding an end to it.
and an expanding ball of fire enveloped them, hid them, spreading out and
out.
perrin threw his arms around his head and dropped behind the stone railing,
huddling there as wind buffeted him and tore at his clothes, a wind as hot as
fire. a wind that was fire. even with his eyes shut, he could see it, flame
billowing across everything, flame blowing through everything. the fiery
gale roared through him, too; he could feel it, burning, tugging, trying to
consume him and scatter the ashes. he yelled, trying to hang onto himself,
knowing it was not enough.
and between one heartbeat and the next, the wind was gone. there was no
diminishing. one instant a storm of flame pummeled him; the next, utter
stillness. the echoes of falling water were the only sound.
slowly, perrin sat up, examining himself. his clothes were unsinged and
whole, his exposed skin unburned. only the memory of heat made him
believe it had happened. a memory in the mind alone; his body felt no
memory of it.
cautiously he peeked over the railing. only a few paces of halfmelted
footing at either end remained of the bridge where the men had been standing.
of them, there was no sign.
a prickling in the hair on the back of his neck made him look up. on a
ramp above him and to the right, a shaggy gray wolf stood looking at him.
no! he scrambled to his feet and ran. this is a dream! a nightmare! i
want to wake up! he ran, and his vision blurred. the blurs shifted. a buzzing
filled his ears, then faded, and as it went, the shimmering in his eyes steadied.


 he shivered with the cold and knew this for a dream, certain and sure, from
the first moment. he was dimly aware of some shadowy memory of dreams
preceding this, but this one he knew. he had been in this place before, on
previous nights, and if he understood nothing of it, he still knew it for a
dream. for once, knowing changed nothing.
huge columns of polished redstone surrounded the open space where he
stood, beneath a domed ceiling fifty paces or more above his head. he and
another man as big could not have encircled one of those columns with their
arms. the floor was paved with great slabs of pale gray stone, hard yet worn
by countless generations of feet.
and centered beneath the dome was the reason why all those feet had come
to this chamber. a sword, hanging hilt down in the air, apparently without
support, seemingly where anyone could reach out and take it. it revolved
slowly, as if some breath of air caught it. yet it was not really a sword. it
seemed made of glass, or perhaps crystal, blade and hilt and crossguard,
catching such light as there was and shattering it into a thousand glitters and
flashes.
he walked toward it and put out his hand, as he had done each time before.
he clearly remembered doing it. the hilt hung there in front of his face,
within easy reach. a foot from the shining sword, his hand splayed out against
empty air as if it had touched stone. as he had known it would. he pushed
harder, but he might as well have been shoving against a wall. the sword
turned and sparkled, a foot away and as far out of reach as if on the other side
of an ocean.
callandor. he was not certain whether the whisper came inside his head or
out; it seemed to echo round the columns, as soft as the wind, everywhere at
once, insistent. callandor. who wields me wields destiny. take me, and begin
the final journey.
he took a step back, suddenly frightened. that whisper had never come
before. four times before he had had this dreamhe could remember that
even now; four nights, one after the otherand this was the first time
anything had changed in it.
the twisted ones come.
it was a different whisper, from a source he knew, and he jumped as if a
myrddraal had touched him. a wolf stood there among the columns, a
mountain wolf, almost waisthigh and shaggy white and gray. it stared at him
intently with eyes as yellow as his own.


 the twisted ones come.
no, perrin rasped. no! i will not let you in! iwillnot!
he clawed his way awake and sat up in his hut, shaking with fear and cold
and anger. i will not, he whispered hoarsely.
the twisted ones come.
the thought was clear in his head, but the thought was not his own.
the twisted ones come, brother.


 c h a p t e r
5


nightmares walking


leaping from his bed, perrin snatched his axe and ran outside, barefoot and
wearing nothing but thin linen, heedless of the cold. the moon bathed the
clouds with pale white. more than enough light for his eyes, more than
enough to see the shapes slipping through the trees from all sides, shapes
almost as big as loial, but with faces distorted by muzzles and beaks, halfhuman heads wearing horns and feathered crests, stealthy forms stalking on
hooves or paws as often as booted feet.
he opened his mouth to shout warning, and suddenly the door of
moiraines hut burst open and lan dashed out, sword in hand and shouting,
trollocs! wake, for your lives! trollocs! shouts answered him as men
began to tumble from their huts, garbed for sleep, which for most meant not at
all, but with swords ready. with a bestial roar, the trollocs rushed forward to
be met with steel and cries of shienar! and the dragon reborn!
lan was fully clothedperrin would have bet the warder had not slept
and he flung himself among the trollocs as if his wool were armor. he
seemed to dance from one to another, man and sword flowing like water or
wind, and where the warder danced, trollocs screamed and died.
moiraine was out in the night as well, dancing her own dance among the
trollocs. her only apparent weapon was a switch, but where she slashed a
trolloc, a line of flame grew on its flesh. her free hand threw fiery balls
summoned from thin air, and trollocs howled as flames consumed them,
thrashing on the ground.
an entire tree burst into flame from root to crown, then another, and
another. trollocs shrieked at the sudden light, but they did not stop swinging
their spiked axes and swords curved like scythes.


 abruptly perrin saw leya step hesitantly out of moiraines cabin, halfway
around the bowl from him, and all thought of anything else left him. the
tuathaan woman pressed her back against the log wall, a hand to her throat.
the light from the burning trees showed him the pain and horror, the loathing
on her face as she watched the carnage.
hide! perrin shouted at her. get back inside and hide! the swelling
roar of fighting and dying swallowed his words. he ran toward her. hide,
leya! for the love of the light, hide!
a trolloc loomed up over him, a cruelly hooked beak where its mouth and
nose should have been. black mail and spikes covered it from shoulders to
knees, and it moved on a hawks talons as it swung one of those strangely
curved swords. it smelled of sweat and dirt and blood.
perrin crouched under the slash, shouting wordlessly as he struck out with
his axe. he knew he should have been afraid, but urgency suppressed fear. all
that mattered was that he had to reach leya, had to get her to safety, and the
trolloc was in the way.
the trolloc fell, roaring and kicking; perrin did not know where he had hit
it, or if it were dying or merely hurt. he leaped over it, where it lay thrashing,
and ran scrambling up the slope.
burning trees cast lurid shadows across the small valley. a flickering
shadow beside moiraines hut suddenly resolved into a trolloc, goatsnouted
and horned. gripping a wildly spiked axe with both hands, it seemed on the
point of rushing down into the fray when its eyes fell on leya.
no! perrin shouted. light, no! rocks skittered away under his bare
feet; he did not feel the bruises. the trollocs axe rose. leyaaaaaaaa!
at the last instant the trolloc spun, axe flashing toward perrin. he threw
himself down, yelling as steel scored his back. desperately he flung out a
hand, caught a goat hoof, and pulled with all his strength. the trollocs feet
came out from under it, and it fell with a crash, but as it slid down the slope, it
seized perrin in hands big enough to make two of his, pulling him along to
roll over and over. the stink of it filled his nostrils, goatstench and sour mansweat. massive arms snaked around his chest, squeezing the air out; his ribs
creaked on the point of breaking. the trollocs axe was gone in the fall, but
blunt goatteeth sank into perrins shoulder, powerful jaws chewing. he
groaned as pain jolted down his left arm. his lungs labored for breath, and
blackness crept in on the edges of his vision, but dimly he was aware that his
other arm was free, that somehow he had held on to his own axe. he held it


 short on the handle, like a hammer, with the spike foremost. with a roar that
took the last of his air, he drove the spike into the trollocs temple.
soundlessly it convulsed, limbs flinging wide, hurling him away. by instinct
alone his hand tightened on the axe, ripping it loose as the trolloc slid further
down the slope, still twitching.
for a moment perrin lay there, fighting for breath. the gash across his back
burned, and he felt the wetness of blood. his shoulder protested as he pushed
himself up. leya?
she was still there, huddled in front of the hut, not more than ten paces
upslope. and watching him with such a look on her face that he could barely
meet her eyes.
dont pity me! he growled at her. dont you!
the myrddraals leap from the roof of the hut seemed to take too long, and
its dead black cloak hung during the slow fall as if the halfman were standing
on the ground already. its eyeless gaze was fixed on perrin. it smelled like
death.
cold seeped through perrins arms and legs as the myrddraal stared at him.
his chest felt like a lump of ice. leya, he whispered. it was all he could do
not to run. leya, please hide. please.
the halfman started toward him, slowly, confident that fear held him in a
snare. it moved like a snake, unlimbering a sword so black only the burning
trees made it visible. cut one leg of the tripod, it said softly, and all fall
down. its voice sounded like dryrotted leather crumbling.
suddenly leya moved, throwing herself forward, attempting to wrap her
arms around the myrddraals legs. it gave an almost casual backwards swing
of its dark sword, never even looking around, and she crumpled.
tears started in the corners of perrins eyes. i should have helped her . . .
saved her. i should have done . . . something! but so long as the myrddraal
stared at him with its eyeless gaze, it was an effort even to think.
we come, brother. we come, young bull.
the words inside his mind made his head ring like a struck bell; the
reverberations shivered through him. with the words came the wolves, scores
of them, flooding into his mind as he was aware of them flooding into the
bowlshaped valley. mountain wolves almost as tall as a mans waist, all
white and gray, coming out of the night at the run, aware of the twolegs
surprise as they darted in to take on the twisted ones. wolves filled him till


 he could barely remember being a man. his eyes gathered the light, shining
golden yellow. and the halfman stopped its advance as if suddenly uncertain.
fade, perrin said roughly, but then a different name came to him, from
the wolves. trollocs, the twisted ones, made during the war of the shadow
from melding men and animals, were bad enough, but the myrddraal.
neverborn! young bull spat. lip curling back in a snarl, he threw himself
at the myrddraal.
it moved like a viper, sinuous and deadly, black sword quick as lightning,
but he was young bull. that was what the wolves called him. young bull,
with horns of steel that he wielded with his hands. he was one with the
wolves. he was a wolf, and any wolf would die a hundred times over to see
one of the neverborn go down. the fade fell back before him, its darting
blade now trying to deflect his slashes.
hamstring and throat, that was how wolves killed. young bull suddenly
threw himself to one side and dropped to a knee, axe slicing across the back
of the halfmans knee. it screameda boneburrowing sound to raise his hair
at any other timeand fell, catching itself with one hand. the halfmanthe
neverbornstill held its sword firmly, but before it could set itself, young
bulls axe struck again. half severed, the myrddraals head flopped over to
hang down its back; yet still leaning there on one hand, the neverborn slashed
wildly with its sword. neverborn were always long in dying.
from the wolves as much as his own eyes young bull received impressions
of trollocs thrashing on the ground, shrieking, untouched by wolf or man.
those would have been linked to this myrddraal, and would die when it did
if no one killed them first.
the urge to rush down the slope and join his brothers, join in killing the
twisted ones, in hunting the remaining neverborn, was strong, but a buried
fragment that was still man remembered. leya.
he dropped his axe and turned her over gently. blood covered her face, and
her eyes stared up at him, glazed with death. an accusing stare, it seemed to
him. i tried, he told her. i tried to save you. her stare did not change.
what else could i have done? it would have killed you if i hadnt killed it!
come, young bull. come kill the twisted ones.
wolf rolled over him, enveloped him. letting leya back down, perrin took
up his axe, blade gleaming wetly. his eyes shone as he raced down the rocky
slope. he was young bull.


 trees scattered around the bowlshaped valley burned like torches; a tall
pine flared into flame as young bull joined the battle. the night air flashed
actinic blue, like sheet lightning, as lan engaged another myrddraal, ancient
aes sedaimade steel meeting black steel wrought in thakandar, in the
shadow of shayol ghul. loial wielded a quarterstaff the size of a fence rail,
the whirling timber marking a space no trolloc entered without falling. men
fought desperately in the dancing shadows, but young bullperrinnoted in
a distant way that too many of the shienaran twolegs were down.
the brothers and sisters fought in small packs of three or four, dodging
scythelike swords and spiked axes, darting in with slashing teeth to sever
hamstrings, lunging to bite out throats as their prey fell. there was no honor
in the way they fought, no glory, no mercy. they had not come for battle, but
to kill. young bull joined one of the small packs, the blade of his axe serving
for teeth.
he no longer thought of the greater battle. there was only the trolloc he
and the wolvesthe brotherscut off from the rest and brought down. then
there would be another, and another, and another, until none were left. none
here, none anywhere. he felt the urge to hurl the axe aside and use his teeth,
to run on all fours as his brothers did. run through the high mountain passes.
run bellydeep in powdery snow pursuing deer. run, with the cold wind
ruffling his fur. he snarled with his brothers, and trollocs howled with fear at
his yelloweyed gaze even more than they did at the other wolves.
abruptly he realized there were no more trollocs standing anywhere in the
bowl, though he could feel his brothers pursuing others as they fled. a pack of
seven had a different prey, somewhere out there in the darkness. one of the
neverborn ran for its hardfooted fourlegsits horse, a distant part of him
saidand his brothers followed, noses filled with its scent, its essence of
death. inside his head, he was with them, seeing with their eyes. as they
closed in, the neverborn turned, cursing, black blade and blackclad
neverborn like part of the night. but night was where his brothers and sisters
hunted.
young bull snarled as the first brother died, its death pain lancing him, yet
the others closed in and more brothers and sisters died, but snapping jaws
dragged the neverborn down. it fought back with its own teeth now, ripping
out throats, slashing with fingernails that sliced skin and flesh like the hard
claws the twolegs carried, but brothers savaged it even as they died. finally a
lone sister heaved herself out of the stilltwitching pile and staggered to one
side. morning mist, she was called, but as with all their names, it was more


 than that: a frosty morning with the bite of snows yet to come already in the
air, and the mist curling thick across the valley, swirling with the sharp breeze
that carried the promise of good hunting. raising her head, morning mist
howled to the cloudhidden moon, mourning her dead.
young bull threw back his head and howled with her, mourned with her.
when he lowered his head, min was staring at him. are you all right,
perrin? she asked hesitantly. there was a bruise on her cheek, and a sleeve
half torn from her coat. she had a cudgel in one hand and a dagger in the
other, and there was blood and hair on both.
they were all staring at him, he saw, all those who were still on their feet.
loial, leaning wearily on his tall staff. shienarans, who had been carrying
their fallen down to where moiraine crouched over one of their number with
lan standing at her side. even the aes sedai was looking his way. the
burning trees, like huge torches, cast a wavering light. dead trollocs lay
everywhere. there were more shienarans down than standing, and the bodies
of his brothers were scattered among them. so many. . . .
perrin realized he wanted to howl again. frantically he walled himself off
from contact with the wolves. images seeped through, emotions, as he tried to
stop them. finally, though, he could no longer feel them, feel their pain, or
their anger, or the desire to hunt the twisted ones, or to run. . . . he gave
himself a shake. the wound on his back burned like fire, and his torn
shoulder felt as if it had been hammered on an anvil. his bare feet, scraped
and bruised, throbbed with his pain. the smell of blood was everywhere. the
smell of trollocs, and death.
i. . . . im all right, min.
you fought well, blacksmith, lan said. the warder raised his stillbloody
sword above his head. taishar manetheren! taishar andor! true blood of
manetheren. true blood of andor.
the shienarans still standingso fewlifted their blades and joined him.
taishar manetheren! taishar andor!
loial nodded. taveren, he added.
perrin lowered his eyes in embarrassment. lan had saved him from the
questions he did not want to answer, but had given him an honor he did not
deserve. the others did not understand. he wondered what they would say if
they knew the truth. min moved closer, and he muttered, leyas dead. i
couldnt. . . . i almost reached her in time.


 it wouldnt have made any difference, she said softly. you know that.
she leaned to look at his back, and winced. moiraine will take care of that
for you. shes healing those she can.
perrin nodded. his back felt sticky with drying blood all the way to his
waist, but despite the pain he hardly noticed it. light, i almost didnt come
back that time. i cant let that happen again. i wont. never again!
but when he was with the wolves, it was all so different. he did not have to
worry about strangers being afraid of him just because he was big, then. there
was no one thinking he was slowwitted just because he tried to be careful.
wolves knew each other even if they had never met before, and with them he
was just another wolf.
no! his hands tightened on the haft of his axe. no! he gave a start as
masema suddenly spoke up.
it was a sign, the shienaran said, turning in a circle to address everyone.
there was blood on his arms and his chesthe had fought in nothing but his
breechesand he moved with a limp, but the light in his eyes was as fervent
as it had ever been. more fervent. a sign to confirm our faith. even wolves
came to fight for the dragon reborn. in the last battle, the lord dragon will
summon even the beasts of the forest to fight at our sides. it is a sign for us to
go forth. only darkfriends will fail to join us. two of the shienarans
nodded.
you shut your bloody mouth, masema! uno snapped. he seemed
untouched, but then uno had been fighting trollocs since before perrin was
born. yet he sagged with weariness; only the painted eye on his eyepatch
seemed fresh. well flaming go forth when the lord dragon bloody well
tells us, and not before! you sheepheaded farmers flaming remember that!
the oneeyed man looked at the growing row of men being tended by
moirainefew were able to as much as sit up, even after she was done with
themand shook his head. at least well have plenty of flaming wolf hides
to keep the wounded warm.
no! the shienarans seemed surprised at the vehemence in perrins
voice. they fought for us, and well bury them with our dead.
uno frowned, and opened his mouth as if to argue, but perrin fixed him
with a steady, yelloweyed stare. it was the shienaran who dropped his gaze
first, and nodded.
perrin cleared his throat, embarrassed all over again as uno gave orders for
the shienarans who were fit to gather the dead wolves. min was squinting at


 him the way she did when she saw things. wheres rand? he asked her.
out there in the dark, she said, nodding upslope without taking her eyes
off him. he will not talk to anyone. he just sits there, snapping at anyone
who comes near him.
he will talk to me, perrin said. she followed him, protesting all the while
that he ought to wait until moiraine had seen to his injuries. light, what does
she see when she looks at me? i dont want to know.
rand was seated on the ground just beyond the light of the burning trees,
with his back against the trunk of a stunted oak. staring at nothing, he had his
arms wrapped around himself, hands under his red coat, as if feeling the cold.
he did not appear to notice their approach. min sat down beside him, but he
did not move even when she laid a hand on his arm. even here perrin smelled
blood, and not only his own.
rand, perrin began, but rand cut him off.
do you know what i did during the fight? still staring into the distance,
rand addressed the night. nothing! nothing useful. at first, when i reached
out for the true source, i couldnt touch it, couldnt grasp it. it kept sliding
away. then, when i finally had hold of it, i was going to burn them all, burn
all the trollocs and fades. and all i could do was set fire to some trees. he
shook with silent laughter, then stopped with a pained grimace. saidin filled
me till i thought id explode like fireworks. i had to channel it somewhere,
get rid of it before it burned me up, and i found myself thinking about pulling
the mountain down and burying the trollocs. i almost tried. that was my
fight. not against the trollocs. against myself. to keep from burying us all
under the mountain.
min gave perrin a pained look, as if asking for help.
we . . . dealt with them, rand, perrin said. he shivered, thinking of all
the wounded men down below. and the dead. better that than the mountain
down on top of us. we didnt need you.
rands head fell back against the tree and his eyes closed. i felt them
coming, he said, nearly whispering. i didnt know what it was, though.
they feel like the taint on saidin. and saidin is always there, calling to me,
singing to me. by the time i knew the difference, lan was already shouting
his warning. if i could only control it, i could have given warning before they
were even close. but half the time when i actually manage to touch saidin, i
dont know what i am doing at all. the flow of it just sweeps me along. i
could have given warning, though.


 perrin shifted his bruised feet uncomfortably. we had warning enough.
he knew he sounded as if he were trying to convince himself. i could have
given warning, too, if id talked with the wolves. they knew there were
trollocs and fades in the mountains. they were trying to tell me. but he
wondered: if he did not keep the wolves out of his mind, might he not be
running with them now? there had been a man, elyas machera, who also
could talk to wolves. elyas ran with the wolves all the time, yet seemed able
to remember he was a man. but he had never told perrin how he did it, and
perrin had not seen him in a long time.
the crunch of boots on rock announced two people coming, and a swirl of
air carried their scents to perrin. he was careful not to speak names, though,
until lan and moiraine were close enough for even ordinary eyes to make
them out.
the warder had a hand under the aes sedais arm, as if trying to support
her without letting her know it. moiraines eyes were haggard, and she carried
a small, agedark ivory carving of a woman in one hand. perrin knew it for an
angreal, a remnant from the age of legends that allowed an aes sedai to
safely channel more of the power than she could alone. it was a measure of
her tiredness that she was using it for healing.
min got to her feet to help moiraine, but the aes sedai motioned her away.
everyone else is seen to, she told min. when i am done here, i can rest.
she shook off lan as well, and a look of concentration appeared on her face
as she traced a cool hand across perrins bleeding shoulder, then along the
wound on his back. her touch made his skin tingle. this is not too bad, she
said. the bruising of your shoulder goes deep, but the gashes are shallow.
brace yourself. this will not hurt, but. . . .
he had never found it easy being near someone he knew was channeling
the one power, and still less if it actually involved him. yet there had been
one or two of those times, and he thought he had some idea what the
channeling entailed, but those healings had been minor, simply washing away
tiredness when moiraine could not afford to have him weary. they had been
nothing like this.
the aes sedais eyes suddenly seemed to be seeing inside him, seeing
through him. he gasped and almost dropped his axe. he could feel the skin on
his back crawling, muscles writhing as they knit back together. his shoulder
quivered uncontrollably, and everything blurred. cold seared him to the bone,
then deeper still. he had the impression of moving, falling, flying; he could
not tell which, but he felt as if he were rushingsomewhere, somehowat


 great speed, forever. after an eternity the world came into focus again.
moiraine was stepping back, half staggering until lan caught her arm.
gaping, perrin looked down at his shoulder. the gashes and bruises were
gone; not so much as a twinge remained. he twisted carefully, but the pain in
his back had vanished as well. and his feet no longer hurt; he did not need to
look to know all the bruises and scrapes were gone. his stomach rumbled
loudly.
you should eat as soon as you can, moiraine told him. a good bit of the
strength for that came from you. you need to replace it.
hungerand images of foodwere already filling perrins head. blood
rare beef, and venison, and mutton, and. . . . with an effort he made himself
stop thinking of meat. he would find some of those roots that smelled like
turnips when they were roasted. his stomach growled in protest.
theres barely even a scar, blacksmith, lan said behind him.
most of the wolves who were hurt made their own way to the forest,
moiraine said, knuckling her back and stretching, but i healed those i could
find. perrin gave her a sharp look, yet she seemed to be just making
conversation. perhaps they came for their own reasons, yet we would likely
all be dead without them. perrin shifted uneasily and dropped his eyes.
the aes sedai reached toward the bruise on mins cheek, but min stepped
back, saying, im not really hurt, and youre tired. ive had worse falling
over my own feet.
moiraine smiled and let her hand fall. lan took her arm; she swayed in his
grip. very well. and what of you, rand? did you take any hurt? even a nick
from a myrddraals blade can be deadly, and some trolloc blades are almost
as bad.
perrin noticed something for the first time. rand, your coat is wet.
rand pulled his right hand from under his coat, a hand covered in blood.
not a myrddraal, he said absently, peering at his hand. not even a trolloc.
the wound i took at falme broke open.
moiraine hissed and jerked her arm free from lan, half fell to her knees
beside rand. pulling back the side of his coat, she studied his wound. perrin
could not see it, for her head was in the way, but the smell of blood was
stronger, now. moiraines hands moved, and rand grimaced in pain.  the
blood of the dragon reborn on the rocks of shayol ghul will free mankind
from the shadow. isnt that what the prophecies of the dragon say?


 who told you that? moiraine said sharply.
if you could get me to shayol ghul now, rand said drowsily, by
waygate or portal stone, there could be an end to it. no more dying. no more
dreams. no more.
if it were as simple as that, moiraine said grimly, i would, one way or
another, but not all in the karaethon cycle can be taken at its face. for every
thing it says straight out, there are ten that could mean a hundred different
things. do not think you know anything at all of what must be, even if
someone has told you the whole of the prophecies. she paused, as if
gathering strength. her grip tightened on the angreal, and her free hand slid
along rands side as if it were not covered in blood. brace yourself.
suddenly rands eyes opened wide, and he sat straight up, gasping and
staring and shivering. perrin had thought, when she healed him, that it went
on forever, but in moments she was easing rand back against the oak.
i have . . . done as much as i can, she said faintly. as much as i can. you
must be careful. it could break open again if. . . . as her voice trailed off, she
fell.
rand caught her, but lan was there in an instant to scoop her up. as the
warder did so, a look passed across his face, a look as close to tenderness as
perrin ever expected to see from lan.
exhausted, the warder said. she has cared for everyone else, but theres
no one to take her fatigue. i will put her to bed.
theres rand, min said slowly, but the warder shook his head.
it isnt that i do not think you would try, sheepherder, he said, but you
know so little you might as soon kill her as help her.
thats right, rand said bitterly. im not to be trusted. lews therin
kinslayer killed everyone close to him. maybe ill do the same before i am
done.
pull yourself together, sheepherder, lan said harshly. the whole world
rides on your shoulders. remember youre a man, and do what needs to be
done.
rand looked up at the warder, and surprisingly, all of his bitterness seemed
to be gone. i will fight the best i can, he said. because theres no one else,
and it has to be done, and the duty is mine. ill fight, but i do not have to like
what ive become. he closed his eyes as if going to sleep. i will fight.


 dreams. . . .
lan stared down at him a moment, then nodded. he raised his head to look
across moiraine at perrin and min. get him to his bed, then see to some
sleep yourselves. we have plans to make, and the light alone knows what
happens next.


 c h a p t e r
6


the hunt begins


perrin did not expect to sleep, but a stomach stuffed with cold stewhis
resolve about the roots had lasted until the smells of suppers leftovers hit his
noseand bone weariness pulled him down on his bed. if he dreamed, he did
not remember. he awoke to lan shaking his shoulders, dawn through the
open door turning the warder to a shadow haloed with light.
rand is gone, was all lan said before he left at a run, but it was more
than enough.
perrin dragged himself up yawning and dressed quickly in the early chill.
outside, only a handful of shienarans were in sight, using their horses to drag
trolloc bodies into the woods, and most of those moved as if they should be
in a sickbed. a body took time to build back the strength that being healed
took.
perrins stomach muttered at him, and his nose tested the breeze in the hope
that someone had already started cooking. he was ready to eat those turniplike roots, raw if need be. there were only the lingering stench of slain
myrddraal, the smells of dead trollocs and men, alive and dead, of horses and
the trees. and dead wolves.
moiraines hut, high on the other side of the bowl, seemed a center of
activity. min hurried inside, and moments later masema came out, then uno.
at a trot the oneeyed man vanished into the trees, toward the sheer rock wall
beyond the hut, while the other shienaran limped down the slope.
perrin started toward the hut. as he splashed across the shallow stream, he
met masema. the shienarans face was haggard, the scar on his cheek
prominent, and his eyes even more sunken than usual. in the middle of the


 stream, he raised his head suddenly and caught perrins coat sleeve.
youre from his village, masema said hoarsely. you must know. why
did the lord dragon abandon us? what sin did we commit?
sin? what are you talking about? whyever rand went, it was nothing you
did or didnt do. masema did not appear satisfied; he kept his grip on
perrins sleeve, peering into his face as if there were answers there. icy water
began to seep into perrins left boot. masema, he said carefully, whatever
the lord dragon did, it was according to his plan. the lord dragon would
not abandon us. or would he? if i were in his place, would i?
masema nodded slowly. yes. yes, i see that, now. he has gone out alone
to spread the word of his coming. we must spread the word, too. yes. he
limped on across the stream, muttering to himself.
squelching at every other step, perrin climbed to moiraines hut and
knocked. there was no answer. he hesitated a moment, then went in.
the outer room, where lan slept, was as stark and simple as perrins own
hut, with a rough bed built against one wall, a few pegs for hanging
possessions, and a single shelf. not much light entered through the open door,
and the only other illumination came from crude lamps on the shelf, slivers of
oily fatwood wedged into cracks in pieces of rock. they gave off thin
streamers of smoke that made a layer of haze under the roof. perrins nose
wrinkled at the smell.
the low roof was only a little higher than his head. loials head actually
brushed it, even seated as he was on one end of lans bed, with his knees
drawn up to make himself small. the ogiers tufted ears twitched uneasily.
min sat crosslegged on the dirt floor beside the door that led to moiraines
room, while the aes sedai paced back and forth in thought. dark thoughts,
they must have been. three paces each way was all she had, but she made
vigorous use of the space, the calm on her face belied by the quickness of her
step.
i think masema is going crazy, perrin said.
min sniffed. with him, how can you tell?
moiraine rounded on him, a tightness to her mouth. her voice was soft.
too soft. is masema the most important thing in your mind this morning,
perrin aybara?
no. id like to know when rand left, and why. did anyone see him go?
does anyone know where he went? he made himself meet her look with one


 just as level and firm. it was not easy. he loomed over her, but she was aes
sedai. is this of your making, moiraine? did you rein him in until he was so
impatient hed go anywhere, do anything, just to stop sitting still? loials
ears went stiff, and he motioned a surreptitious warning with one thickfingered hand.
moiraine studied perrin with her head tilted to one side, and it was all he
could do not to drop his eyes. this is none of my doing, she said. he left
sometime during the night. when and how and why, i yet hope to learn.
loials shoulders heaved in a quiet sigh of relief. quiet for an ogier, it
sounded like steam rushing out from quenching redhot iron. never anger an
aes sedai, he said in a whisper obviously meant just for himself, but audible
to everyone.  better to embrace the sun than to anger an aes sedai. 
min reached up enough to hand perrin a folded piece of paper. loial went
to see him after we got him to bed last night, and rand asked to borrow pen
and paper and ink.
the ogiers ears jerked, and he frowned worriedly until his long eyebrows
hung down on his cheeks. i did not know what he was planning. i didnt.
we know that, min said. no one is accusing you of anything, loial.
moiraine frowned at the paper, but she did not try to stop perrin from
reading. it was in rands hand.
what i do, i do because there is no other way. he is hunting me again,
and this time one of us has to die, i think. there is no need for those
around me to die, also. too many have died for me already. i do not want
to die either, and will not, if i can manage it. there are lies in dreams, and
death, but dreams hold truth, too.
that was all, with no signature. there was no need for perrin to wonder
who rand meant by he. for rand, for all of them, there could be only one.
baalzamon.
he left that tucked under the door there, min said in a tight voice. he
took some old clothes the shienarans had hanging out to dry, and his flute,
and a horse. nothing else but a little food, as far as we can tell. none of the
guards saw him go, and last night they would have seen a mouse creeping.
and would it have done any good if they had? moiraine said calmly.
would any of them have stopped the lord dragon, or even challenged him?
some of themmasema for onewould slit their own throats if the lord


 dragon told them to.
it was perrins turn to study her. did you expect anything else? they
swore to follow him. light, moiraine, hed never have named himself dragon
if not for you. what did you expect of them? she did not speak, and he went
on more quietly. do you believe, moiraine? that hes really the dragon
reborn? or do you just think hes someone you can use before the one power
kills him or drives him mad?
go easy, perrin, loial said. not so angry.
ill go easy when she answers me. well, moiraine?
he is what he is, she said sharply.
you said the pattern would force him to the right path eventually. is that
what this is, or is he just trying to get away from you? for a moment he
thought he had gone too farher dark eyes sparkled with angerbut he
refused to back down. well?
moiraine took a deep breath. this may well be what the pattern has
chosen, yet i did not mean for him to go off alone. for all his power, he is as
defenseless as a babe in many ways, and as ignorant of the world. he
channels, but he has no control over whether or not the one power comes
when he reaches for it and almost as little over what he does with it if it does
come. the power itself will kill him before he has a chance to go mad if he
does not learn that control. there is so much he must learn, yet. he wants to
run before he has learned to walk.
you split hairs and lay false trails, moiraine. perrin snorted. if he is
what you say he is, did it never occur to you that he might know what he has
to do better than you?
he is what he is, she repeated firmly, but i must keep him alive if he is
to do anything. he will fulfill no prophecies dead, and even if he manages to
avoid darkfriends and shadowspawn, there are a thousand other hands ready
to slay him. all it will take is a hint of the hundredth part of what he is. yet if
that were all he might face, i would not worry half so much as i do. there are
the forsaken to be accounted for.
perrin gave a start; from the corner, loial moaned.  the dark one and all
the forsaken are bound in shayol ghul,  perrin began by rote, but she gave
him no time to finish.
the seals are weakening, perrin. some are broken, though the world does
not know that. must not know that. the father of lies is not free. yet. but as


 the seals weaken, more and more, which of the forsaken may be loosed
already? lanfear? sammael? asmodean, or belal, or ravhin? ishamael
himself, the betrayer of hope? they were thirteen altogether, perrin, and
bound in the sealing, not in the prison that holds the dark one. thirteen of the
most powerful aes sedai of the age of legends, the weakest of them stronger
than the ten strongest aes sedai living today, the most ignorant with all the
knowledge of the age of legends. and every man and woman of them gave
up the light and dedicated their souls to the shadow. what if they are free,
and out there waiting for him? i will not let them have him.
perrin shivered, partly from the icy iron in her last words, and partly from
thought of the forsaken. he did not want to think of even one of the forsaken
loose in the world. his mother had frightened him with those names when he
was little. ishamael comes for boys who do not tell their mothers the truth.
lanfear waits in the night for boys who do not go to bed when they are
supposed to. being older did not help, not when he knew now they were all
real. not when moiraine said they might be free.
bound in shayol ghul, he whispered, and wished he still believed it.
troubled, he studied rands letter again. dreams. he was talking about
dreams yesterday, too.
moiraine stepped closer, and peered up into his face. dreams? lan and
uno came in, but she waved them to silence. the small room was more than
crowded now, with five people in it besides the ogier. what dreams have
you had the last few days, perrin? she ignored his protest that there was
nothing wrong with his dreams. tell me, she insisted. what dream have
you had that was not ordinary? tell me. her gaze seized him like smithy
tongs, willing him to speak.
he looked at the othersthey were all watching him fixedly, even min
then hesitantly told of the one dream that seemed unusual to him, the dream
that came every night. the dream of the sword he could not touch. he did not
mention the wolf that had appeared in the last.
callandor, lan breathed when he was done. rockhard face or no, he
looked stunned.
yes, moiraine said, but we must be absolutely certain. speak to the
others. as lan hurried out, she turned to uno. and what of your dreams?
did you dream of a sword, too?
the shienaran shifted his feet. the red eye painted on his patch stared
straight at moiraine, but his real eye blinked and wavered. i dream about


 flamuh, about swords all the time, moiraine sedai, he said stiffly. i
suppose ive dreamed about a sword the last few nights. i dont remember my
dreams the way lord perrin here does.
moiraine said, loial?
my dreams are always the same, moiraine sedai. the groves, and the
great trees, and the stedding. we ogier always dream of the stedding when
we are away from them.
the aes sedai turned back to perrin.
it was just a dream, he said. nothing but a dream.
i doubt it, she said. you describe the hall called the heart of the stone,
in the fortress called the stone of tear, as if you had stood in it. and the
shining sword is callandor, the sword that is not a sword, the sword that
cannot be touched.
loial sat up straight, bumping his head on the roof. he did not seem to
notice. the prophecies of the dragon say the stone of tear will never fall till
callandor is wielded by the dragons hand. the fall of the stone of tear will
be one of the greatest signs of the dragons rebirth. if rand holds callandor,
the whole world must acknowledge him as the dragon.
perhaps. the word floated from the aes sedais lips like a shard of ice on
still water.
perhaps? perrin said. perhaps? i thought that was the final sign, the last
thing to fulfill your prophecies.
neither the first nor the last, moiraine said. callandor will be but one
fulfillment of the karaethon cycle, as his birth on the slopes of
dragonmount was the first. he has yet to break the nations, or shatter the
world. even scholars who have studied the prophecies for their entire lives do
not know how to interpret them all. what does it mean that he shall slay his
people with the sword of peace, and destroy them with the leaf? what does it
meant that he shall bind the nine moons to serve him? yet these are given
equal weight with callandor in the cycle. there are others. what wounds of
madness and cutting of hope has he healed? what chains has he broken, and
who put into chains? and some are so obscure that he may already have
fulfilled them, although i am not aware of it. but, no. callandor is far from
the end of it.
perrin shrugged uneasily. he knew only bits and pieces of the prophecies;
he had liked hearing them even less since rand had let moiraine put that


 banner in his hands. no, it had been before that, even. since a journey by
portal stone had convinced him his life was bound to rands.
moiraine was continuing. if you think he has simply to put out his hand,
loial son of arent son of halan, you are a fool, as is he if he thinks it. even if
he lives to reach tear, he may never attain the stone.
tairens have no love for the one power, and less for any man claiming to
be the dragon. channeling is outlawed, and aes sedai are tolerated at best, so
long as they do not channel. telling the prophecies of the dragon, or even
possessing a copy of them, is enough to put you in prison, in tear. and no one
enters the stone of tear without permission of the high lords; none but the
high lords themselves enter the heart of the stone. he is not ready for this.
not ready.
perrin grunted softly. the stone would never fall till the dragon reborn
held callandor. how in the light is he supposed to reach itinside a bloody
fortress!before the fortress falls? it is madness!
why are we just sitting here? min burst out. if rand is going to tear,
why arent we following him? he could be killed, or . . . or. . . . why are we
sitting here?
moiraine put a hand on mins head. because i must be sure, she said
gently. it is not comfortable being chosen by the wheel, to be great or to be
near greatness. the chosen of the wheel can only take what comes.
i am tired of taking what comes. min scrubbed a hand across her eyes.
perrin thought he saw tears. rand could be dying while we wait. moiraine
smoothed mins hair; there was a look almost of pity on the aes sedais face.
perrin sat down on the end of lans bed opposite loial. the smell of
people was thick in the roompeople and worry and fear; loial smelled of
books and trees as well as worry. it felt like a trap, with the walls around
them, and all so close. the burning slivers stank. how can my dream tell
where rand is going? he asked. it was my dream.
those who can channel the one power, moiraine said quietly, those
who are particularly strong in spirit, can sometimes force their dreams on
others. she did not stop her soothing of min. especially on those who are
susceptible. i do not believe rand did it on purpose, but the dreams of those
touching the true source can be powerful. for one as strong as he, they could
possibly seize an entire village, or perhaps even a city. he knows little of
what he does, and even less of how to control it.


 then why didnt you have it, too? he demanded. or lan. uno stared
straight ahead, looking as if he would rather be anywhere else, and loials
ears wilted. perrin was too tired and too hungry to care whether he showed
proper respect for an aes sedai. and too angry, as well, he realized. why?
moiraine answered calmly. aes sedai learn to shield their dreams. i do it
without thinking, when i sleep. warders are given something much the same
in the bonding. the gaidin could not do what they must if the shadow could
steal into their dreams. we are all vulnerable when we sleep, and the shadow
is strong in the night.
theres always something new from you, perrin growled. cant you tell
us what to expect once in a while, instead of explaining after it happens?
uno looked as though he was trying to think of a reason to leave.
moiraine gave perrin a flat look. you want me to share a lifetime of
knowledge with you in a single afternoon? or even a single year? i will tell
you this. be wary of dreams, perrin aybara. be very wary of dreams.
he pulled his eyes away from hers. i am, he murmured. i am.
after that, silence, and no one seemed to want to break it. min sat staring at
her crossed ankles, but apparently taking some comfort from moiraines
presence. uno stood against the wall, not looking at anyone. loial forgot
himself enough to pull a book from his coat pocket and try to read in the dim
light. the wait was long, and far from easy for perrin. its not the shadow in
my dreams im afraid of. its wolves. i will not let them in. i wont!
lan returned, and moiraine straightened eagerly. the warder answered the
question in her eyes. half of them remember dreaming of swords the last
four nights running. some remember a place with great columns, and five say
the sword was crystal, or glass. masema says he saw rand holding it last
night.
that one would, moiraine said. she rubbed her hands together briskly;
she seemed suddenly full of energy. now i am certain. though i still wish i
knew how he left here unseen. if he has rediscovered some talent from the
age of legends. . . .
lan looked at uno, and the oneeyed man shrugged in dismay. i bloody
forgot, with all this flaming talk about bloo he cleared his throat, shooting
a glance at moiraine. she looked back expectantly, and he went on. i mean
. . . uh . . . that is, i followed the lord dragons tracks. theres another way
into that closed valley, now. the . . . the earthquake brought down the far
wall. its a hard climb, but you can get a horse up it. i found more tracks at the


 top, and theres an easy way from there around the mountain. he let out a
long breath when he was done.
good, moiraine said. at least he has not rediscovered how to fly, or
make himself invisible, or something else out of legend. we must follow him
without delay. uno, i will give you enough gold to take you and the others as
far as jehannah, and the name of someone there who will see that you get
more. the ghealdanin are wary of strangers, but if you keep to yourselves,
they should not trouble you. wait there until i send word.
but we will go with you, he protested. we have all sworn to follow the
dragon reborn. i do not see how the few of us can take a fortress that has
never fallen, but with the lord dragons aid, we will do what must be done.
so we are the people of the dragon, now. perrin laughed mirthlessly. 
the stone of tear will never fall till the people of the dragon come. have
you given us a new name, moiraine?
watch your tongue, blacksmith, lan growled, all ice and stone.
moiraine gave them both sharp looks, and they fell silent. forgive me,
uno, she said, but we must travel quickly if we are to have a hope of
overtaking him. you are the only shienaran fit enough for a hard ride, and we
cannot afford the days the others will need to regain full strength. i will send
for you when i can.
uno grimaced, but he bowed in acquiescence. at her dismissal, he squared
his shoulders and left to tell the others.
well, i am going along, whatever you say, min put in firmly.
you are going to tar valon, moiraine told her.
i am no such thing!
the aes sedai went on smoothly as if the other woman had not spoken.
the amyrlin seat must be told what has happened, and i cannot count on
finding one i can trust who has messenger pigeons. or that the amyrlin will
see any message i send by pigeon. it is a long journey, and hard. i would not
send you alone if there were anyone to send with you, but i will see you have
money, and letters to those who might help you on your way. you must ride
quickly, though. when your horse tires, buy anotheror steal one, if you
mustbut ride quickly.
let uno take your message. hes fit; you said so. i am going after rand.
uno has his duties, min. and do you think a man could simply walk up to


 the gates of the white tower and demand an audience with the amyrlin seat?
even a king would be made to wait days if he arrived unannounced, and i fear
any of the shienarans would be left kicking their heels for weeks, if not
forever. not to mention that something so unusual would be known to
everyone in tar valon before the first sunset. few women seek audiences
with the amyrlin herself, but it does happen, and it should occasion no great
comment. no one must learn even as much as that the amyrlin seat has
received a message from me. her lifeand ourscould depend on it. you
are the one who must go.
min sat there opening and closing her mouth, obviously searching for
another argument, but moiraine had already gone on. lan, i very much fear
we will find more evidence of his passing than i would like, but i will rely on
your tracking. the warder nodded. perrin? loial? will you come with me
after rand? from her place against the wall, min gave an indignant squawk,
but the aes sedai ignored it.
i will come, loial said quickly. rand is my friend. and i will admit it; i
would not miss anything. for my book, you see.
perrin was slower to answer. rand was his friend, whatever he had become
in the forging. and there was that near certainty of their futures being linked,
though he would have avoided that part of it if he could. it has to be done,
doesnt it? he said finally. i will come.
good. moiraine rubbed her hands together again, with the air of someone
settling to work. you must all ready yourselves at once. rand has hours on
us. i mean to be well along his trail before midday.
slender as she was, the force of her presence herded all of them but lan
toward the door, loial walking stooped over until he was through the
doorway. perrin thought of a goodwife herding geese.
once outside, min hung back for a moment to address lan with a toosweet smile. and is there any message you want carried? to nynaeve,
perhaps?
the warder blinked as if caught off guard, like a horse on three legs. does
everyone know? he regained his balance almost immediately. if there is
anything else she needs to hear from me, i will tell her myself. he closed the
door nearly in her face.
men! min muttered at the door. too blind to see what a stone could see,
and too stubborn to be trusted to think for themselves.


 perrin inhaled deeply. faint smells of death still hung in the valley air, but
it was better than the closeness inside. some better.
clean air, loial sighed. the smoke was beginning to bother me a little.
they started down the slope together. beside the stream below, the
shienarans who could stand were gathered around uno. from his gestures the
oneeyed man was making up for lost time with his cursing.
how did you two become privileged? min demanded abruptly. she
asked you. she didnt do me the courtesy of asking.
loial shook his head. i think she asked because she knew what we would
answer, min. moiraine seems able to read perrin and me; she knows what
well do. but you are a closed book to her.
min appeared only a little mollified. she looked up at them, perrin head
and shoulders taller on one side and loial towering even higher on the other.
much good it does me. i am still going where she wants as easily as you two
little lambs. you were doing well for a while, perrin. standing up to her like
shed sold you a coat and the seams were popping open.
i did stand up to her, didnt i, perrin said wonderingly. he had not really
realized he had done that. it was not so bad as id have thought it would be.
you were lucky, loial rumbled.  to anger an aes sedai is to put your
head in a hornets nest. 
loial, min said, i need to speak to perrin. alone. would you mind?
oh. of course not. he lengthened his stride to its normal span and
quickly moved ahead of them, pulling his pipe and tabac pouch from a coat
pocket.
perrin eyed her warily. she was biting her lip, as if considering what to say.
do you ever see things about him? he asked, nodding after the ogier.
she shook her head. i think it only works with humans. but ive seen
things around you that you ought to know about.
ive told you
dont be more thickheaded than you have to be, perrin. back there, right
after you said youd go. they were not there before. they must have to do
with this journey. or at least with you deciding to go.
after a moment he said reluctantly, what did you see?
an aielman in a cage, she said promptly. a tuathaan with a sword. a


 falcon and a hawk, perching on your shoulders. both female, i think. and all
the rest, of course. what is always there. darkness swirling round you, and


none of that! he said quickly. when he was sure she had stopped, he
scratched his head, thinking. none of it made any sense to him. do you have
any idea what it all means? the new things, i mean.
no, but theyre important. the things i see always are. turning points in
peoples lives, or whats fated. its always important. she hesitated for a
moment, glancing at him. one more thing, she said slowly. if you meet a
womanthe most beautiful woman youve ever seenrun!
perrin blinked. you saw a beautiful woman? why should i run from a
beautiful woman?
cant you just take advice? she said irritably. she kicked at a stone and
watched it roll down the slope.
perrin did not like jumping to conclusionsit was one of the reasons some
people thought him slowwittedbut he totaled up a number of things min
had said in the last few days and came to a startling conclusion. he stopped
dead, hunting for words. uh . . . min, you know i like you. i like you, but.
. . . uh . . . you sort of remind me of my sisters. i mean, you. . . . the flow
stumbled to a halt as she raised her head to look at him, eyebrows arched. she
wore a small smile.
why, perrin, you must know that i love you. she stood there, watching
his mouth work, then spoke slowly and carefully. like a brother, you great
woodenheaded lummox! the arrogance of men never ceases to amaze me.
you all think everything has to do with you, and every woman has to desire
you.
perrin felt his face growing hot. i never. . . . i didnt. . . . he cleared his
throat. what did you see about a woman?
just take my advice, she said, and started down toward the stream again,
walking fast. if you forget all the rest, she called over her shoulder, heed
that!
he frowned after herfor once his thoughts seemed to arrange themselves
quicklythen caught up in two strides. its rand, isnt it?
she made a sound in her throat and gave him a sidelong look. she did not
slow down, though. maybe you arent so boneheaded after all, she
muttered. after a moment she added, as if to herself, im bound to him as


 surely as a stave is bound to the barrel. but i cant see if hell ever love me in
return. and i am not the only one.
does egwene know? he asked. rand and egwene had been all but
promised since childhood. everything but kneeling in front of the womens
circle of the village to speak the betrothal. he was not sure how far they had
drifted from that, if at all.
she knows, min said curtly. much good it does either of us.
what about rand? does he know?
oh, of course, she said bitterly. i told him, didnt i? rand, i did a
viewing of you, and it seems i have to fall in love with you. i have to share
you, too, and i dont much like that, but there it is. youre a woodenheaded
wonder after all, perrin aybara. she dashed a hand across her eyes angrily.
if i could be with him, i know i could help. somehow. light, if he dies, i
dont know if i can stand it.
perrin shrugged uncomfortably. listen, min. ill do what i can to help
him. however much that is. i promise you that. it really is best for you to go
to tar valon. youll be safe there.
safe? she tasted the word as if wondering what it meant. you think tar
valon is safe?
if theres no safety in tar valon, theres no safety anywhere.
she sniffed loudly, and in silence they went to join those preparing to leave.


 c h a p t e r
7


the way out of the mountains


the way down out of the mountains was hard, but the lower they went, the
less perrin needed his furlined cloak. hour by hour, they rode out of the
tailings of winter and into the first days of spring. the last remnants of snow
vanished, and grasses and wildflowerswhite maidens hope and pink jump
upbegan to cover the high meadows they crossed. trees appeared more
often, with more leaves, and grasslarks and robins sang in the branches. and
there were wolves. never in sightnot even lan mentioned seeing onebut
perrin knew. he kept his mind firmly closed to them, yet now and again a
featherlight tickle at the back of his mind reminded him they were there.
lan spent most of his time scouting their path on his black warhorse,
mandarb, following rands tracks as the rest of them followed the signs the
warder left for them. an arrow of stones laid out on the ground, or one lightly
scratched in the rock wall of a forking pass. turn this way. cross that
saddlepass. take this switchback, this deer trail, this way through the trees
and down along a narrow stream, even though there is nothing to indicate
anyone has ever gone that way before. nothing but lans signs. a tuft of
grass or weeds tied one way to say bear left, another for bear right. a bent
branch. a pile of pebbles for a rough climb ahead, two leaves caught on a
thorn for a steep descent. the warder had a hundred signs, it seemed to
perrin, and moiraine knew them all. lan rarely came back except when they
made camp, to confer with moiraine quietly, away from the fire. when the
sun rose, most often he was hours gone already.
moiraine was always first into the saddle after him, while the eastern sky
was just turning pink. the aes sedai would not have climbed down from
aldieb, her white mare, until full dark or later, except that lan refused to


 track further once the light began to fail.
well go even slower if a horse breaks a leg, the warder would tell
moiraine when she complained.
her reply was always very much the same. if you cannot move any faster
than this, perhaps i should send you off to myrelle before you get any older.
well, perhaps that can wait, but you must move us faster.
she half sounded as if the threat were irritated truth, half as if she were
making a joke. there was something of a threat in it, or maybe a warning,
perrin was sure, from the way lans mouth tightened even when she smiled
afterwards and reached up to pat his shoulder soothingly.
who is myrelle? perrin asked suspiciously, the first time it happened.
loial shook his head, murmuring something about unpleasant things
happening to those who pried into aes sedai affairs. the ogiers hairyfetlocked horse was as tall and heavy as a dhurran stallion, but with loials
long legs dangling to either side, the animal looked undersized, like a large
pony.
moiraine gave an amused, secretive smile. just a green sister. someone to
whom lan must one day deliver a package for safekeeping.
no day soon, lan said, and surprisingly, there was open anger in his
voice. never, if i can help it. you will outlive me long, moiraine aes sedai!
she has too many secrets, perrin thought, but asked no more about a
subject that could crack the warders iron selfcontrol.
the aes sedai had a blanketwrapped bundle tied behind her saddle: the
dragon banner. perrin was uneasy about having it with them, but moiraine
had neither asked his opinion nor listened when he offered it. not that anyone
was likely to recognize it if he saw it, yet he hoped she was as good at
keeping secrets from other people as she was at keeping them from him.
in the beginning, at least, it was a boring journey. one cloudcapped
mountain was very much like another, one pass little different from the next.
supper was usually rabbit, dropped by stones from perrins sling. he did not
have so many arrows as to risk shooting at rabbits in that rocky country.
breakfast was cold rabbit, more often than not, and the midday meal the
same, eaten in the saddle.
sometimes when they camped near a stream and there was still light
enough to see, he and loial caught mountain trout, lying on their bellies,
hands elbowdeep in the cold water, tickling the greenbacked fish out from


 under the rock ledges where they hid. loials fingers, big as they were, were
even more deft at it than perrins.
once, three days after setting out, moiraine joined them, stretching herself
out on the streamside and undoing rows of pearl buttons to roll up her sleeves
as she asked how the thing was done. perrin exchanged surprised looks with
loial. the ogier shrugged.
it is not that hard, really, perrin told her. just bring your hand up from
behind the fish, and underneath, as if youre trying to tickle its belly. then
you pull it out. it takes practice, though. you might not catch anything the
first few times you try.
i tried for days before i ever caught anything, loial added. he was
already easing his huge hands into the water, careful to keep his shadow from
scaring the fish.
as difficult as that? moiraine murmured. her hands slipped into the
waterand a moment later came out with a splash, holding a fat trout that
thrashed the surface. she laughed with delight as she tossed it up onto the
bank.
perrin blinked at the big fish flopping in the fading sunlight. it must have
weighed at least five pounds. you were very lucky, he said. trout that size
dont often shelter under a ledge this small. well have to move upstream a
bit. it will be dark before any of them settle under this ledge again.
is that so? moiraine said. you two go ahead. i think i will just try here
again.
perrin hesitated a moment before moving up the bank to another overhang.
she was up to something, but he could not imagine what. that troubled him.
belly down, and careful not to let his shadow fall on the water, he peered over
the edge. half a dozen slender shapes hung suspended in the water, barely
moving a fin to hold their places. all of them together would not weigh as
much as moiraines fish, he decided with a sigh. if they were lucky, he and
loial might take two apiece, but the shadows of trees on the far bank already
stretched across the water. whatever they caught now would be it, and loials
appetite was big enough by itself to swallow those four and most of the bigger
fish, too. loials hands were already easing up behind one of the trout.
before perrin could even slide his hands into the water, moiraine gave a
shout. three should be enough, i think. the last two are bigger than the
first.


 perrin gave loial a startled look. she cant have!
the ogier straightened, sending the small trout scattering. she is aes
sedai, he said simply.
sure enough, when they returned to moiraine, three big trout lay on the
bank. she was already buttoning her sleeves up again.
perrin thought about reminding her that whoever took the fish was
supposed to clean them, too, but just at that moment she caught his eye. there
was no particular expression on her smooth face, but her dark eyes did not
waver, and they appeared to know what he was going to say, and to have
dismissed it out of hand already. when she turned away, it seemed somehow
too late to say anything.
muttering to himself, perrin pulled out his beltknife and set to the gutting
and heading. all of a sudden shes forgotten about sharing the chores, it
seems. i suppose shell want us to do the cooking, as well, and the cleaning
up after.
no doubt she will, loial said without pausing over the fish he was
working on. she is aes sedai.
i seem to remember hearing that somewhere. perrins knife ripped into
the fish. the shienarans might have been willing to run around fetching and
carrying for her, but there are only four of us now. we should keep on turn
and turn about. its only fair.
loial gave a great snort of laughter. i doubt she sees it that way. first she
had to put up with rand arguing with her all the time, and now youre ready
to take over for him. as a rule, aes sedai do not let anyone argue with them. i
expect she means to have us back in the habit of doing what she says by the
time we reach the first village.
a good habit to be in, lan said, throwing back his cloak. in the fading
light he had appeared out of nowhere.
perrin nearly fell over from surprise, and loials ears went stiff with shock.
neither of them had heard the warders step.
a habit you should never have lost, lan added, then strode off toward
moiraine and the horses. his boots barely made a sound, even on that rocky
ground, and once he was a few paces away the cloak hanging down his back
gave him the uneasy appearance of a disembodied head and arms drifting up
from the stream.


 we need her to find rand, perrin said softly, but i am not going to let
her shape my life anymore. he went back to his cleaning vigorously.
he meant to keep that promisehe really didbut during the days that
followed, in some way he did not quite understand, he found that he and loial
were doing the cooking, and the cleaning up, and any other little chore that
moiraine thought of. he even discovered that somehow or other he had taken
over tending aldieb every night, unsaddling the mare and rubbing her down
while moiraine settled herself, apparently deep in thought.
loial gave in to it as inevitable, but not perrin. he tried refusing, resisting,
but it was hard to resist when she made a reasonable suggestion, and a small
one at that. only there was always another suggestion behind it, as reasonable
and small as the first, and then another. the simple force of her presence, the
strength of her gaze, made it difficult to protest. her dark eyes would catch
his at the moment he opened his mouth. a lift of her eyebrow to suggest he
was being rude, a surprised widening of her eyes that he could object to so
small a request, a level stare that held in it everything that was aes sedai, all
these things could make him hesitate, and once he hesitated there was never
any recovering lost ground. he accused her of using the one power on him,
though he did not really think that was it, and she told him not to be a fool. he
began to feel like a piece of iron trying to stop a smith from hammering it into
a scythe.
the mountains of mist gave way abruptly to the forested foothills of
ghealdan, to land that seemed all up and down, but never very high. deer,
which in the mountains had often watched them warily, as if uncertain what a
man was, began to bound away, white tails flickering, at the first sight of the
horses. even perrin now caught only the faintest glimpses of the graystriped
mountain cats that seemed to fade away like smoke. they were coming into
the lands of men.
lan stopped wearing his colorshifting cloak and began riding back to the
rest of them more often, telling them what lay ahead. in many places the trees
had all been cut down. soon, fields encircled by rough stone walls and
farmers plowing round the sides of hills were common sights, if not exactly
frequent, along with lines of people moving across the plowed ground,
sowing seed from sacks slung from their shoulders. scattered farmhouses and
barns of gray stone sat on hilltops and ridges.
the wolves should not have been there. wolves avoided places where men
were, but perrin could still sense them, an unseen screen and escort ringing
the mounted party. impatience filled him; impatience to reach a village or a


 town, any place where there were enough men to make the wolves go away.
a day after sighting the first field, just as the sun touched the horizon
behind them, they came to the village of jarra, not far north of the border with
amadicia.


 c h a p t e r
8


jarra


gray stone houses with slate roofs lay clustered along the few narrow
streets of jarra, clinging to a hillside above a little stream spanned by a low
wooden bridge. the muddy streets were empty, and so was the sloping village
green, except for one man sweeping the steps of the villages only inn,
standing beside its stone stable; but it looked as if there had been a good many
people on the green not long before. half a dozen arches, woven of green
branches and dotted with such few flowers as could be found this early in the
year, stood in a circle in the middle of the grass. the ground had a trampled
look, and there were other signs of a gathering; a womans red scarf lying
tangled at the foot of one of the arches, a childs knitted cap, a pewter pitcher
tumbled on its side, a few halfeaten scraps of food.
the aromas of sweet wine and spiced cakes clung about the green, mixed
in with smoke from dozens of chimneys and evening meals cooking. for an
instant perrins nose caught another odor, one he could not identify, a faint
trail that raised the hair on the back of his neck with its vileness. then it was
gone. but he was sure something had passed that way, somethingwrong. he
scrubbed at his nose as if to rub away the memory of it. that cant be rand.
light, even if he has gone mad, that cant be him. can it?
a painted sign hung above the inn door, a man standing on one foot with
his arms thrown in the air: harilins leap. as they drew rein in front of the
square stone building, the sweeper straightened, yawning fiercely. he gave a
start at perrins eyes, but his own already protruding eyes went wide when
they fell on loial. with his wide mouth and no chin to speak of, he looked
something like a frog. there was an old smell of sour wine about himto
perrin, at least. the fellow had certainly been part of the celebration.


 the man gave himself a shake, and turned it into a bow with one hand
resting on the double row of wooden buttons running down his coat. his eyes
flickered from one to another of them, popping even more every time they
rested on loial. welcome, good mistress, and the light illumine your way.
welcome, good masters. you wish food, rooms, baths? all to be had, here at
the leap. master harod, the innkeeper, keeps a good house. i am called
simion. if you wish anything, ask for simion, and he will get it for you. he
yawned again, covering his mouth in embarrassment and bowing to hide it. i
beg your pardon, good mistress. you have come far? have you word of the
great hunt? the hunt for the horn of valere? or the false dragon? its said
theres a false dragon in tarabon. or maybe arad doman.
we have not come that far, lan said, swinging down from his saddle.
no doubt you know more than i. they all began dismounting.
you have had a wedding here? moiraine said.
a wedding, good mistress? why, weve had a lifetime of weddings. a
plague of them. all in the last two days. there isnt a woman old enough to
speak the betrothal remains unmarried, not in the whole village, not for a mile
in any direction. why, even widow jorath dragged old banas through the
arches, and theyd both sworn theyd never marry again. it was like a
whirlwind just snatched everybody up. rilith, the weavers daughter, she
started it, asking jon the blacksmith to marry her, and him old enough to be
her father and more. the old fool just took off his apron and said yes, and she
demanded the arches be put up right then and there. wouldnt hear of a proper
wait, and all the other women sided with her. since then weve had marriages
day and night. why, nobodys had any sleep at all hardly.
thats very interesting, perrin said when simion paused to yawn again,
but have you seen a young
it is very interesting, moiraine said, cutting him off, and i would hear
more of it later, perhaps. for now, we would like rooms, and a meal. lan
made a small gesture toward perrin, down low, as if telling him to hold his
tongue.
of course, good mistress. a meal. rooms. simion hesitated, eyeing
loial. well have to push two beds together for he leaned closer to
moiraine and dropped his voice. pardon, good mistress, butuhwhat
exactlyis he? meaning no disrespect, he added hastily.
he had not spoken softly enough, for loials ears twitched irritably. i am
an ogier! what did you think i was? a trolloc?


 simion took a step back at the booming voice. trolloc, gooduh
master? why, im a grown man. i dont believe in childrens tales. uh, did
you say ogier? why, ogier are childri mean . . . that is. . . . in desperation,
he turned to bellow toward the stable next to the inn. nico! patrim! visitors!
come see to their horses! after a moment two boys with hay in their hair
tumbled out of the stable, yawning and rubbing their eyes. simion gestured to
the steps, bowing, as the boys gathered reins.
perrin slung his saddlebags and blanketroll over his shoulder and carried
his bow as he followed moiraine and lan inside, with simion bowing and
bobbing ahead of them. loial had to duck low under the lintel, and the ceiling
inside only cleared his head by a foot. he kept rumbling to himself about not
understanding why so few humans remembered the ogier. his voice was like
distant thunder. even perrin, right in front of him, could only understand half
of his words.
the inn smelled of ale and wine, cheese and weariness, and the aroma of
roasting mutton drifted from somewhere in the back. the few men in the
common room sagged over their mugs as if they would really like to lie down
on the benches and go to sleep. one plump serving woman was drawing a
mug of ale from one of the barrels at the end of the room. the innkeeper
himself, in a long white apron, sat on a tall stool in the corner, leaning against
the wall. as the newcomers entered, he lifted his head, blearyeyed. his jaw
dropped at the sight of loial.
visitors, master harod, simion announced. they want rooms. master
harod? hes an ogier, master harod. the serving woman turned and saw
loial, and dropped the mug with a clatter. none of the weary men at the
tables even looked up. one had put his head down on the table and was
snoring.
loials ears twitched violently.
master harod got to his feet slowly, eyes fastened on loial, smoothing his
apron all the while. at least he isnt a whitecloak, he said at last, then gave
a start as if surprised he had spoken aloud. that is to say, welcome, good
mistress. good masters. forgive my lack of manners. i can only plead
tiredness, good mistress. he darted another glance at loial, and mouthed
ogier? with a look of disbelief.
loial opened his mouth, but moiraine forestalled him. as your man said,
good innkeeper, i wish rooms for my party for the night, and a meal.
oh! of course, good mistress. of course. simion, show these good people


 to my best rooms, so they can put down their belongings. ill have a fine meal
laid out for you when you return, good mistress. a fine meal.
if it pleases you to follow me, good mistress, simion said. good
masters. he bowed the way to stairs at one side of the common room.
behind them, one of the men at the tables suddenly exclaimed, what in
the name of the light is that? master harod began explaining about ogier,
making it sound as if he were quite familiar with them. most of what perrin
heard before they left the voices behind was wrong. loials ears twitched
without stop.
on the second floor, the ogiers head came near to brushing along the
ceiling. the narrow corridor was growing dark, with only the sharp light of
sunset through a window next to the door at the far end.
candles in the rooms, good mistress, simion said. i should have brought
a lamp, but my head is still spinning from all those weddings. ill send
someone up to light the fire, if you wish. and youll want wash water, of
course. he pushed open a door. our best room, good mistress. we dont
have manynot many strangers, you seebut this is our best.
ill take the one next to it, lan said. he had moiraines blanketroll and
saddlebags on his shoulder as well as his own, and the bundle containing the
dragon banner, too.
oh, good master, thats not a very good room at all. narrow bed.
cramped. meant for a servant, i suspect, as if wed ever have anybody here
who had a servant. begging your pardon, good mistress.
i will take it anyway, lan said firmly.
simion, moiraine said, does master harod dislike the children of the
light?
well, he does, good mistress. he didnt, but he does. it isnt good policy,
disliking the children, not so close to the border as we are. they come
through jarra all the time, like there wasnt any border at all. but there was
trouble, yesterday. a fistful of trouble. and with the weddings going on, and
all.
what happened, simion?
the man looked at her sharply before answering. perrin did not think
anyone else saw how sharply, in the dimness. there was about twenty of
them, come day before yesterday. no trouble then. but yesterday. . . . why,


 three of them up and announced they werent children of the light anymore.
they took off their cloaks and just rode away.
lan grunted. whitecloaks swear for life. what did their commander do?
why, he would have done something, you can be sure, good master, but
another of them announced he was off to find the horn of valere. anyway,
still another said they should be hunting the dragon. that one said he was
going to almoth plain when he left. then some of them started saying things
to women in the streets, things they shouldnt have, and grabbing at them.
the women were screaming, and children yelling at the ones bothering the
women. i never saw such commotion.
didnt any of you try to stop them? perrin said.
good master, you carry that axe like you know how to use it, but it isnt so
easy to face up to men with swords and armor and all, when all you know
how to use is a broom or a hoe. the rest of the whitecloaks, those as hadnt
gone off, put an end to it. almost came to drawing swords. and that wasnt
the worst. two more just went madif the others werent. those two started
raving that jarra was full of darkfriends. they tried to burn the village down
said they would!beginning with the leap. you can see the burn marks
out back, where they got it started. fought the other whitecloaks when they
tried to stop them. the whitecloaks that were left, they helped us put it out,
tied those two up tight, and rode out of here, back toward amadicia. good
riddance, i say, and if they never come back, itll be too soon.
rough behavior, lan said, even for whitecloaks.
simion bobbed his head in agreement. as you say, good master. they
never acted like that before. swagger around, yes. look at you like you were
dirt, and poke their noses in where they hadnt any business. but they never
caused trouble before. not like that, anyway.
they are gone now, moiraine said, and troubles with them. i am sure we
will pass a quiet night.
perrin kept his mouth shut, but he was not quiet inside. all these weddings
and whitecloaks are all very well, but id sooner know if rand stopped here,
and which way he went when he left. that smell couldnt have been him.
he let simion guide him on down the hall to another room, with two beds
and a washstand, a pair of stools and not much else. loial stooped to put his
head through the doorway. only a little light came in by the narrow windows.
the beds were big enough, with blankets and comforters folded at the foot,


 but the mattresses looked lumpy. simion fumbled on the mantel above the
fireplace until he found a candle, and a tinderbox to get it alight.
ill see about getting some beds put together for you, gooduhogier.
yes, just a moment, now. he showed no sign of hurry to be about it, though,
fussing with the candlestick as if he had to place it just right. perrin thought
he looked uneasy.
well, id be more than uneasy if whitecloaks had been acting like that in
emonds field. simion, has another stranger passed through here in the last
day or two? a young man, tall, with gray eyes and reddish hair? he might
have played the flute for a meal or a bed.
i remember him, good master, simion said, still shifting the candlestick.
came yesterday morning, early. looked hungry, he did. he played the flute
for all the weddings, yesterday. goodlooking young fellow. some of the
women eyed him, at first, but. . . . he paused, looking at perrin sideways. is
he a friend of yours, good master?
i know him, perrin said. why?
simion hesitated. no reason, good master. he was an odd fellow, thats
all. he talked to himself, sometimes, and sometimes he laughed when nobody
had said anything. slept in this very room, last night, or part of it. woke us all
in the middle of the night, yelling. it was just a nightmare, but he wouldnt
stay any longer. master harod didnt make much effort to talk him into it,
after all that noise. simion paused again. he said something strange when
he left.
what? perrin demanded.
he said somebody was after him. he said. . . . the chinless man
swallowed and went on more slowly. said theyd kill him if he didnt go.
one of us has to die, and i mean it to be him. his very words.
he did not mean us, loial rumbled. we are his friends.
of course, gooduhgood ogier. of course, he didnt mean you. iuh
i dont mean to say anything about a friend of yours, but iuhi think
hes sick. in the head, you know.
we will take care of him, perrin said. thats why were following him.
which way did he go?
i knew it, simion said, bouncing on his toes. i knew she could help as
soon as i saw you. which way? east, good master. east, like the dark one


 himself was on his heels. do you think shell help me? help my brother, that
is? noams bad sick, and mother roon says she cant do anything.
perrin kept his face expressionless, and bought a little time to think by
propping his bow in the corner and setting his blanketroll and saddlebags on
one of the beds. the problem was that thinking did not help much. he looked
at loial, but found no help there; consternation had the ogiers ears drooping
and his long eyebrows hanging down on his cheeks. what makes you think
she can help your brother? stupid question! the right question is, what does
he mean to do about it?
why, i traveled to jehannah, once, good master, and i saw two . . . two
women like her. i couldnt mistake her after that. his voice dropped to a
whisper. its said they can raise the dead, good master.
who else knows this? perrin asked sharply, and at the same time loial
said, if your brother is dead, there is nothing anyone can do.
the frogfaced man looked from one to the other of them anxiously, and
his words came in a babble. no one knows but me, good master. noam isnt
dead, good ogier, only sick. i swear nobody else could recognize her. even
master harods never been more than twenty miles from here in his life. hes
so bad sick. id ask her myself, only my kneesd be shaking so hard she
couldnt hear me talk. what if she took offense and called down lightning on
me? and what if id been wrong? it isnt the kind of thing you accuse a
woman of without. . . . i mean . . . uh. . . . he raised his hands, half in
pleading, half as if to defend himself.
i can make no promises, perrin said, but ill speak to her. loial, why
dont you keep simion company till ive spoken to moiraine?
of course, the ogier boomed. simion gave a start when loials hand
swallowed his shoulder. he will show me my room, and we will talk. tell
me, simion, what do you know of trees?
tttrees, ggood ogier?
perrin did not wait any longer. he hurried back down the dark hall and
knocked on moiraines door, barely waiting for her peremptory come!
before pushing in.
half a dozen candles showed that the leaps best room was none too good,
though the one bed had four tall posts supporting a canopy, and the mattress
looked less full of lumps than perrins. there was a scrap of carpet on the
floor, and two cushioned chairs instead of stools. other than that, it looked no


 different from his room. moiraine and lan stood in front of the cold hearth as
if they had been discussing something, and the aes sedai did not look pleased
at being interrupted. the warders face was as imperturbable as a carving.
rands been here, all right, perrin started off. that fellow simion
remembers him. moiraine hissed through her teeth.
you were told to keep your mouth shut, lan growled.
perrin squared his feet to face the warder. that was easier than facing
moiraines glare. how could we find out whether he had been here without
asking questions? tell me that. he left last night, if you are interested,
heading east. and he was carrying on about somebody following him, trying
to kill him.
east. moiraine nodded. the utter calm of her voice was at odds with her
disapproving eyes. that is good to know, though it had to be so if he is going
to tear. but i was fairly certain he had been here even before i heard about
the whitecloaks, and they made it a certainty. rand is almost surely right
about one thing, perrin. i cannot believe we are the only ones trying to find
him. and if they find out about us, they may well try to stop us. we have
enough to contend with trying to catch up to rand without that. you must
learn to hold your tongue until i tell you to speak.
the whitecloaks? perrin said incredulously. hold my tongue? burn me,
if i will! how could they tell you? rands madness. it is catching?
not his madness, moiraine said, if he is far enough gone yet to be called
mad. perrin, he is more strongly taveren than anyone since the age of
legends. yesterday, in this village, the pattern . . . moved, shaped itself
around him like clay shaped on a mold. the weddings, the whitecloaks, these
were enough to say rand had been here, for anyone who knew to listen.
perrin drew a long breath. and this is what well find everywhere hes
been? light, if there are shadowspawn after him, they can track him as easily
as we can.
perhaps, moiraine said. perhaps not. no one knows anything about
taveren as strong as rand. for just a moment she sounded vexed at not
knowing. artur hawkwing was the most strongly taveren of whom any
writings remain. and hawkwing was in no way as strong as rand.
it is said, lan put in, that there were times when people in the same
room with hawkwing spoke truth when they meant to lie, made decisions
they had not even known they were contemplating. times when every toss of


 the dice, every turn of the cards, went his way. but only times.
you mean you dont know, perrin said. he could leave a trail of
weddings and whitecloaks gone mad all the way to tear.
i mean i know as much as there is to know, moiraine said sharply. her
darkeyed gaze chastised perrin like a whip. the pattern weaves finely
around taveren, and others can follow the shape of those threads if they know
where to look. be careful your tongue does not unravel more than you can
know.
in spite of himself perrin hunched his shoulders as if she were delivering
real blows. well, you had better be glad i opened my mouth this time.
simion knows youre aes sedai. he wants you to heal his brother noam of
some sickness. if i hadnt talked to him, he would never have worked up
nerve enough to ask, but he might have started talking among his friends.
lan caught moiraines eye, and for a moment they stared at one another.
the warder had the air about him of a wolf about to leap. finally, moiraine
shook her head. no, she said.
as you wish. it is your decision. lan sounded as if he thought she had
made the wrong one, but the tension left him.
perrin stared at them. you were thinking of. . . . simion couldnt tell
anyone if he were dead, could he?
he will not die by my actions, moiraine said. but i cannot, and will not,
promise that it will always be so. we must find rand, and i will not fail in
that. is that spoken plainly enough for you? caught in her gaze, perrin could
make no answer. she nodded as if his silence were answer enough. now take
me to simion.
the door to loials room stood open, spilling a pool of candlelight into the
hall. the two beds inside had been pushed together, and loial and simion
were seated on the edge of one. the chinless man was staring up at loial with
his mouth open and an expression of wonder on his face.
oh, yes, the stedding are wonderful, loial was saying. there is such
peace there, under the great trees. you humans may have your wars and
strife, but nothing ever troubles the stedding. we tend the trees and live in
harmony. . . . he trailed off when he saw moiraine, with lan and perrin
behind her.
simion scrambled to his feet, bowing and backing away until he came up
against the far wall. uh . . . good mistress. . . . uh . . . uh. . . . even then, he


 continued bobbing like a toy on a string.
show me to your brother, moiraine commanded, and i will do what i
can. perrin, you will come, too, since this good man spoke to you first. lan
lifted an eyebrow, and she shook her head. if we all go, we might attract
attention. perrin can give me what protection i need.
lan nodded reluctantly, then gave perrin a hard look. see that you do,
blacksmith. if any harm befalls her. . . . his cold blue eyes finished the
promise.
simion snatched one of the candles and scurried into the hallway, still
bowing so the candlelight made their shadows dance. this wayuhgood
mistress. this way.
beyond the door at the end of the hall, outside stairs led down to a cramped
alleyway, between inn and stable. night shrank the candle to a flickering
pinpoint. the half moon was up in a starflecked sky, giving more than
enough light for perrins eyes. he wondered when moiraine would tell
simion he did not have to keep bowing, but she never did. the aes sedai
glided along, clutching her skirts to keep them out of the mud, as though the
dark passage were a palace hall and she a queen. the air was already cooling;
nights still carried echoes of winter.
this way. simion led them back to a small shed behind the stable and
hurriedly unbarred the door. this way. simion pointed. there, good
mistress. there. my brother. noam.
the far end of the shed had been barred off with slats of wood; hastily, by
the rough look of it. a stout iron lock in a hasp held shut a crude door of
wooden slats. behind those bars, a man lay sprawled on his stomach on the
strawcovered floor. he was barefoot, his shirt and breeches ripped as if he
had torn at them without knowing how to take them off. there was an odor of
unwashed flesh that perrin thought even simion and moiraine must smell.
noam lifted his head and stared at them silently, without expression. there
was nothing at all about him to suggest he was simions brotherhe had a
chin, for one thing, and he was a big man, with heavy shouldersbut that was
not what staggered perrin. noam stared at them with burnished golden eyes.
hed been talking crazy almost a year, good mistress, saying he could . . .
could talk with wolves. and his eyes. . . . simion darted a glance at perrin.
well, hed talk about it when hed drunk too much. everybody laughed at
him. then a month or so ago, he didnt come to town. i went out to see what
was the matter, and i found himlike this.


 cautiously, unwillingly, perrin reached out toward noam as he would have
toward a wolf. running through the woods with the cold wind in his nose.
quick dash from cover, teeth snapping at hamstrings. taste of blood, rich on
the tongue. kill. perrin jerked back as he would have from a fire, sealed
himself off. they were not thoughts at all, really, just a chaotic jumble of
desires and images, part memory, part yearning. but there was more wolf
there than anything else. he put a hand to the wall to steady himself; his
knees felt weak. light help me!
moiraine put a hand on the lock.
master harod has the key, good mistress. i dont know if hell
she gave a tug, and the lock sprang open. simion gaped at her. she lifted
the lock free of the hasp, and the chinless man turned to perrin.
is that safe, good master? hes my brother, but he bit mother roon when
she tried to help, and he . . . he killed a cow. with his teeth, he finished
faintly.
moiraine, perrin said, the man is dangerous.
all men are dangerous, she replied in a cool voice. now be quiet. she
opened the door and went in. perrin held his breath.
at her first step, noams lips peeled back from his teeth, and he began to
growl, a rumble that deepened till his whole body quivered. moiraine ignored
it. still growling, noam wriggled backwards in the straw as she came closer
to him, until he had backed himself into a corner. or she had backed him.
slowly, calmly, the aes sedai knelt and took his head between her hands.
noams growl heightened to a snarl, then tailed off in a whimper before perrin
could move. for a long moment moiraine held noams head, then just as
calmly released it and rose. perrins throat tightened as she turned her back on
noam and walked out of the cage, but the man only stared after her. she
pushed the slatted door to, slipped the lock back through the hasp, not
bothering to snap it shutand noam hurled himself snarling against the
wooden bars. he bit at them, and battered them with his shoulders, tried to
force his head between them, all the while snarling and snapping.
moiraine brushed straw from her skirt with a steady hand and no
expression.
you do take chances, perrin breathed. she looked at hima steady,
knowing gazeand he dropped his eyes. his yellow eyes.


 simion was staring at his brother. can you help him, good mistress? he
asked hoarsely.
i am sorry, simion, she said.
cant you do anything, good mistress? something? one of thosehis
voice fell to a whisperaes sedai things?
healing is not a simple matter, simion, and it comes from within as much
as from the healer. there is nothing here that remembers being noam,
nothing that remembers being a man. there are no maps remaining to show
him the path back, and nothing left to take that path. noam is gone, simion.
hehe just used to talk funny, good mistress, when hed had too much to
drink. he just. . . . simion scrubbed a hand across his eyes and blinked.
thank you, good mistress. i know youd have done something if you could.
she put a hand on his shoulder, murmured comforting words, and then she
was gone from the shed.
perrin knew he should follow her, but the manwhat had once been a man
snapping at the wooden bars, held him. he took a quick step and surprised
himself by removing the dangling lock from the hasp. the lock was a good
one, the work of a master smith.
good master?
perrin stared at the lock in his hand, at the man behind in the cage. noam
had stopped biting at the slats; he stared back at perrin warily, panting. some
of his teeth had broken off jaggedly.
you can leave him in here forever, perrin said, but ii dont think hell
ever get any better.
if he gets out, good master, hell die!
he will die in here or out there, simion. out there, at least hell be free,
and as happy as he can be. he is not your brother anymore, but youre the one
who has to decide. you can leave him in here for people to stare at, leave him
to stare at the bars of his cage until he pines away. you cannot cage a wolf,
simion, not and expect it to be happy. or live long.
yes, simion said slowly. yes, i see. he hesitated, then nodded, and
jerked his head toward the shed door.
that was all the answer perrin needed. he swung back the slatted door and
stood aside.
for a moment noam stared at the opening. abruptly he darted out of the


 cage, running on all fours, but with surprising agility. out of the cage, out of
the shed, and into the night. the light help us both, perrin thought.
i suppose its better for him to be free. simion gave himself a shake. but
i dont know what master harod will say when he finds that door standing
open and noam gone.
perrin shut the cage door; the big lock made a sharp click as he refastened
it. let him puzzle that out.
simion barked a quick laugh, abruptly cut off. hell make something out
of it. they all will. some of them say noam turned into a wolffur and all!
when he bit mother roon. its not true, but they say it.
shivering, perrin leaned his head against the cage door. he may not have
fur, but hes a wolf. hes wolf, not man. light, help me.
we didnt keep him here always, simion said suddenly. he was at
mother roons house, but she and i got master harod to move him here after
the whitecloaks came. they always have a list of names, darkfriends theyre
looking for. it was noams eyes, you see. one of the names the whitecloaks
had was a fellow named perrin aybara, a blacksmith. they said he has yellow
eyes, and runs with wolves. you can see why i didnt want them to know
about noam.
perrin turned his head enough to look at simion over his shoulder. do you
think this perrin aybara is a darkfriend?
a darkfriend wouldnt care if my brother died in a cage. i suppose she
found you soon after it happened. in time to help. i wish shed come to jarra a
few months ago.
perrin was ashamed that he had ever compared the man to a frog. and i
wish she could have done something for him. burn me, i wish she could.
suddenly it burst on him that the whole village must know about noam.
about his eyes. simion, would you bring me something to eat in my room?
master harod and the rest might have been too taken with staring at loial to
notice his eyes before, but they surely would if he ate in the common room.
of course. and in the morning, too. you dont have to come down until
you are ready to get on your horse.
you are a good man, simion. a good man. simion looked so pleased that
perrin felt ashamed all over again.


  c h a p t e r
9


wolf dreams


perrin returned to his room by the back way, and after a time simion came
up with a covered tray. the cloth did not hold in the smells of roasted mutton,
sweetbeans, turnips, and freshly baked bread, but perrin lay on his bed,
staring at the whitewashed ceiling, until the aromas grew cold. images of
noam ran through his head over and over again. noam chewing at the
wooden slats. noam running off into the darkness. he tried to think of lockmaking, of the careful quenching and shaping of the steel, but it did not work.
ignoring the tray, he rose and made his way down the hall to moiraines
room. she answered his rap on the door with, come in, perrin.
for an instant all the old stories about aes sedai stirred again, but he
pushed them aside and opened the door.
moiraine was alonefor which he was gratefulsitting with an ink bottle
balanced on her knee, writing in a small, leatherbound book. she corked the
bottle and wiped the steel nib of her pen on a small scrap of parchment
without looking at him. there was a fire in the fireplace.
i have been expecting you for some time, she said. i have not spoken
about this before because it was obvious you did not want me to. after
tonight, though. . . . what do you want to know?
is that what i can expect? he asked. to end like that?
perhaps.
he waited for more, but she only put pen and ink away in their small case
of polished rosewood and blew on her writing to dry it. is that all? moiraine,
dont give me slippery aes sedai answers. if you know something, tell me.


 please.
i know very little, perrin. while searching for other answers among the
books and manuscripts two friends keep for their researches, i found a copied
fragment of a book from the age of legends. it spoke of . . . situations like
yours. that may be the only copy anywhere in the world, and it did not tell
me much.
what did it tell you? anything at all is more than i know now. burn me,
ive been worrying about rand going mad, but i never thought i had to worry
about myself!
perrin, even in the age of legends, they knew little of this. whoever
wrote it seemed uncertain whether it was truth or legend. and i only saw a
fragment, remember. she said that some who talked to wolves lost
themselves, that what was human was swallowed up by wolf. some. whether
she meant one in ten, or five, or nine, i do not know.
i can shut them out. i dont know how i do it, but i can refuse to listen to
them. i can refuse to hear them. will that help?
it may. she studied him, seeming to choose her words carefully. mostly,
she wrote of dreams. dreams can be dangerous for you, perrin.
you said that once before. what do you mean?
according to her, wolves live partly in this world, and partly in a world of
dreams.
a world of dreams? he said disbelievingly.
moiraine gave him a sharp look. that is what i said, and that is what she
wrote. the way wolves talk to one another, the way they talk to you, is in
some way connected to this world of dreams. i do not claim to understand
how. she paused, frowning slightly. from what i have read of aes sedai
who had the talent called dreaming, dreamers sometimes spoke of
encountering wolves in their dreams, even wolves that acted as guides. i fear
you must learn to be as careful sleeping as waking, if you intend to avoid
wolves. if that is what you decide to do.
if that is what i decide? moiraine, i will not end up like noam. i wont!
she eyed him quizzically, shaking her head slowly. you speak as if you
can make all your own choices, perrin. you are taveren, remember. he
turned his back on her, staring at the nightdark windows, but she continued:
perhaps, knowing what rand is, knowing how strongly taveren he is, i have


 paid too little attention to the other two taveren i found with him. three
taveren in the same village, all born within weeks of one another? that is
unheard of. perhaps youand mathave larger purposes in the pattern than
you, or i, thought.
i do not want any purpose in the pattern, perrin muttered. i surely cant
have one if i forget i am a man. will you help me, moiraine? it was hard to
say that. what if it means her using the one power? would i rather forget im
a man? help me keep fromlosing myself?
if i can keep you whole, i will. i promise you that, perrin. but i will not
endanger the struggle against the shadow. you must know that, too.
when he turned to look at her, she was regarding him unblinkingly. and if
your struggle means putting me in my grave tomorrow, will you do that, too?
he was icily sure that she would. what have you not told me?
do not presume too far, perrin, she said coldly. do not press me further
than i think proper.
he hesitated before asking the next question. can you do for me what you
did for lan? can you shield my dreams?
i already have a warder, perrin. her lips quirked almost into a smile.
and one is all i will have. i am of the blue ajah, not the green.
you know what i mean. i dont want to be a warder. light, bound to an
aes sedai the rest of my life? thats as bad as the wolves.
it would not aid you, perrin. the shielding is for dreams from the outside.
the danger in your dreams is within you. she opened the small book again.
you should sleep, she said in dismissal. be wary of your dreams, but you
must sleep sometime. she turned a page, and he left.
back in his own room, he eased the hold he kept on himself, eased it just a
trifle, let his senses spread. the wolves were out there still, beyond the edges
of the village, ringing jarra. almost immediately he snapped back to rigid
selfcontrol. what i need is a city, he muttered. that would keep them at
bay. after i find rand. after i finish whatever has to be finished with him. he
was not sure how sorry he was that moiraine could not shield him. the one
power or the wolves; that was a choice no man should have to make.
he left the fire laid on the hearthstone unlit, and threw open both windows.
cold night air rushed in. tossing blankets and comforter on the floor, he lay
down fully clothed on the lumpy bed, not bothering to try to find a
comfortable position. his last thought before sleep came was that if anything


 would keep him from deep sleep and dangerous dreams, that mattress would.
he was in a long hallway, its high stone ceiling and walls glistening with
damp and streaked by odd shadows. they lay in contorted strips, stopping as
abruptly as they began, too dark for the light between them. he had no idea
where the light came from.
no, he said, then louder, no! this is a dream. i need to wake up. wake
up!
the hallway did not change.
danger. it was a wolfs thought, faint and distant.
i will wake up. i will! he pounded a fist against the wall. it hurt, but he
did not wake. he thought one of the sinuous shadows shifted away from his
blow.
run, brother. run.
hopper? he said wonderingly. he was sure he knew the wolf whose
thoughts he heard. hopper, who had envied the eagles. hopper is dead!
run!
perrin lurched into a run, one hand holding his axe to keep the haft from
banging against his leg. he had no idea where he was running, or why, but the
urgency of hoppers sending could not be ignored. hoppers dead, he
thought. hes dead! but perrin ran.
other hallways crossed the one he ran along, at odd angles, sometimes
descending, sometimes climbing. none looked any different from the passage
he was in, though. damp stone walls unbroken by doors, and strips of
darkness.
as he came on one of those crossing halls, he skidded to a halt. a man
stood there, blinking at him uncertainly, in strangely cut coat and breeches,
the coat flaring over his hips as the bottoms of the breeches flared over his
boots. both were bright yellow, and his boots were only a little paler.
this is more than i can stand, the man said, to himself, not perrin. he had
an odd accent, quick and sharp. not only do i dream of peasants, now, but
foreign peasants, from those clothes. begone from my dreams, fellow!
who are you? perrin asked. the mans eyebrows rose as if he were
offended.


 the strips of shadow around them writhed. one detached from the ceiling
at one end and drifted down to touch the strange mans head. it appeared to
tangle in his hair. the mans eyes widened, and everything seemed to happen
at once. the shadow jerked back to the ceiling, ten feet overhead, trailing
something pale. wet drops splattered perrins face. a bonerattling shriek
shattered the air.
frozen, perrin stared at the bloody shape wearing the mans clothes,
screaming and thrashing on the floor. unbidden, his eyes rose to the pale
thing like an empty sack that dangled from the ceiling. part of it was already
absorbed by the black strip, but he had no trouble recognizing a human skin,
apparently whole and unbroken.
the shadows around him danced in agitation, and perrin ran, pursued by
dying screams. ripples ran along the shadow strips, pacing him.
change, burn you! he shouted. i know its a dream! light burn you,
change!
colorful tapestries hung along the walls between tall golden stands holding
dozens of candles that illuminated white floor tiles and a ceiling painted with
fluffy clouds and fanciful birds in flight. nothing moved but the flickering
candle flames along the length of that hall, stretching as far as he could see, or
in the pointed arches of white stone that occasionally broke the walls.
danger. the sending was even fainter than before. and more urgent, if that
were possible.
axe in hand, perrin started warily down the hall, muttering to himself.
wake up. wake up, perrin. if you know its a dream, it changes or you wake
up. wake up, burn you! the hallway stayed as solid as any he had ever
walked.
he came abreast of the first of the pointed white archways. it let into a
huge room, apparently windowless, but furnished as ornately as any palace,
the furniture all carved and gilded and inlaid with ivory. a woman stood in
the middle of the room, frowning at a tattered manuscript lying open on a
table. a blackhaired, blackeyed, beautiful woman clothed in white and
silver.
even as he recognized her, she lifted her head and looked straight at him.
her eyes widened, in shock, in anger. you! what are you doing here? how
did you? youll ruin things you could not begin to imagine!
abruptly the space seemed to flatten, as if he were suddenly staring at a


 picture of a room. the flat image appeared to turn sideways, become only a
bright vertical line down the middle of blackness. the line flashed white, and
was gone, leaving only the dark, blacker than black.
just in front of perrins boots, the floor tiles came to an abrupt end. as he
watched, the white edges dissolved into the black like sand washed away by
water. he stepped back hastily.
run.
perrin turned, and hopper was there, a big gray wolf, grizzled and scarred.
you are dead. i saw you die. i felt you die! a sending flooded perrins
mind.
run now! you must not be here now. danger. great danger. worse than all
the neverborn. you must go. go now! now!
how? perrin shouted. i want to go, but how?
go! teeth bared, hopper leaped for perrins throat.
with a strangled cry, perrin sat up on the bed, hands going to his throat to
hold in lifeblood. they met unbroken skin. he swallowed with relief, but the
next moment his fingers touched a damp spot.
almost falling in his haste, he scrambled off the bed, stumbled to the
washstand and seized the pitcher, splashed water everywhere as he filled the
basin. the water turned pink as he washed his face. pink with the blood of
that strangely dressed man.
more dark spots dotted his coat and breeches. he tore them off and tossed
them into the furthest corner. he meant to leave them there. simion could
burn them.
a gust of wind whipped in the open window. shivering in shirt and
smallclothes, he sat on the floor and leaned back against the bed. this should
be uncomfortable enough. sourness tinged his thoughts, and worry, and fear.
and determination. i wont give in to this. i wont!
he was still shivering when sleep finally came, a shallow half sleep filled
with vague awareness of the room around him and thoughts of the cold. but
the bad dreams that came were better than some others.
rand huddled under the trees in the night, watching the heavyshouldered


 black dog come nearer his hiding place. his side ached, the wound moiraine
could not quite heal, but he ignored it. the moon gave barely enough light
for him to make out the dog, waisthigh, with its thick neck and massive head,
and its teeth that seemed to shine like wet silver in the night. it sniffed the air
and trotted toward him.
closer, he thought. come closer. no warning for your master this time.
closer. thats it. the dog was only ten paces away, now, a deep growl
rumbling in its chest as it suddenly bounded forward. straight at rand.
the power filled him. something leaped from his outstretched hands; he
was not sure what it was. a bar of white light, solid as steel. liquid fire. for
an instant, in the middle of that something, the dog seemed to become
transparent, and then it was gone.
the white light faded except for the afterimage burned across rands
vision. he sagged against the nearest tree trunk, the bark rough on his face.
relief and silent laughter shook him. it worked. light save me, it worked this
time. it had not always. there had been other dogs this night.
the one power pulsed in him, and his stomach twisted with the dark
ones taint on saidin, wanted to empty itself. sweat beaded on his face
despite the cold night wind, and his mouth tasted full of sickness. he wanted
to lie down and die. he wanted nynaeve to give him some of her medicines,
or moiraine to heal him, or. . . . something, anything, to stop the sick feeling
that was suffocating him.
but saidin flooded him with life, too, life and energy and awareness larded
through the illness. life without saidin was a pale copy. anything else was a
wan imitation.
but they can find me if i hold on. track me, find me. i have to reach tear.
ill find out there. if i am the dragon, therell be an end to it. and if i am not.
. . . if its all a lie, there will be an end to that, too. an end.
reluctantly, with infinite slowness, he severed contact with saidin, gave up
its embrace as if giving up lifes breath. the night seemed drab. the shadows
lost their infinite sharp shadings and washed together.
in the distance, to the west, a dog howled, a shivering cry in the silent
night.
rands head came up. he peered in that direction as though he could see
the dog if he tried hard enough.
a second dog answered the first, then another, and two more together, all


 spread out somewhere west of him.
hunt me, rand snarled. hunt me if you will. im no easy meat. no
more!
pushing himself away from the tree, he waded a shallow, icy stream, then
settled into a steady trot eastward. cold water filled his boots, and his side
hurt, but he ignored both. the night was quiet again behind him, but he
ignored that, too. hunt me. i can hunt, too. i am no easy meat.


 c h a p t e r
1 0


secrets


ignoring her companions for a moment, egwene alvere stood in her stirrups
hoping for a glimpse of tar valon in the distance, but all she could see was
something indistinct, gleaming white in the morning sunlight. it had to be the
city on the island, though. the lone, brokentopped mountain called
dragonmount, rising out of the rolling plain, had first appeared on the horizon
late the afternoon before, and that lay just this side of the river erinin from
tar valon. it was a landmark, that mountainone jagged fang sticking up out
of rolling flatlandseasily seen for many miles, easy to avoid, as all did,
even those who went to tar valon.
dragonmount was where lews therin kinslayer had died, so it was said;
and other words had been spoken of the mountain, prophecy and warning.
rich reasons to stay away from its black slopes.
she had reason not to stay away, and more than one. only in tar valon
could she find the training she needed, the training she had to have. i will
never be collared again! she pushed the thought away, but it came back
turned end about. i will never lose my freedom again! in tar valon, anaiya
would resume testing her dreams; the aes sedai would have to, though she
had found no real evidence that egwene was a dreamer, as anaiya suspected.
egwenes dreams had been troubling since leaving almoth plain. aside from
dreams of the seanchanand those still made her wake sweatingshe
dreamed more and more of rand. rand running. running toward something,
but running away from something, too.
she peered harder toward tar valon. anaiya would be there. and galad,
too, perhaps. she blushed in spite of herself, and banished him from her mind


 entirely. think about the weather. think about anything else. light, but it feels
warm.
this early in the year, with winter only yesterdays memory, white still
capped dragonmount, but here below, the snows were melted. early shoots
poked through the matted brown of last years grasses, and where trees topped
a low hill here and there, the first red of new growth was showing. after a
winter spent traveling, sometimes trapped in village or camp for days by
storms, sometimes covering less ground between sunrise and sunset, with
snowdrifts bellydeep on the horses, than she could have walked by noon in
better weather, it was good to see signs of spring.
sweeping her thick wool cloak back out of her way, egwene let herself
drop down in the highcantled saddle, and smoothed her skirts in a gesture of
impatience. her dark eyes filled with distaste. she had worn the dress, divided
for riding by her own skill with a needle, for far too long, but the only other
she had was even more grubby. and the same color, the dark gray of the
leashed ones. the choice all those weeks ago, on beginning their ride to tar
valon, had been dark gray or nothing.
i swear i will never wear gray again, bela, she told her shaggy mount,
patting the mares neck. not that ill have much choice once were back in the
white tower, she thought. in the tower, all novices wore white.
are you talking to yourself again? nynaeve asked, pulling her bay
gelding closer. the two women were of a height as well as dressed alike, but
the difference in their horses put the former wisdom of emonds field a head
taller. nynaeve frowned now, and tugged at the thick braid of dark hair
hanging over her shoulder, the way she did when worried or troubled, or
sometimes when she was preparing to be particularly stubborn even for her. a
great serpent ring on her finger marked her as one of the accepted, not yet
aes sedai, but a long step closer than egwene. better you should be keeping
watch.
egwene held her tongue on the retort that she had been watching for tar
valon. did she think i was standing in my stirrups because i do not like my
saddle? nynaeve seemed to forget too often that she was not the wisdom of
emonds field any longer, and egwene was no longer a child. but she wears
the ring and i do notyet!and for her, that means nothing has changed!
do you wonder how moiraine is treating lan? she asked sweetly, and
had a moment of pleasure at the sharp jerk nynaeve gave her braid. the
pleasure faded quickly, though. wounding remarks did not come naturally to


 her, and she knew nynaeves emotions concerning the warder were like
skeins of yarn after a kitten had gotten into the knitting basket. but lan was
no kitten, and nynaeve would have to do something about the man before his
stubbornstupid nobility made her mad enough to kill him.
they were six altogether, all plainly dressed enough not to stand out in the
villages and small towns they had encountered, yet perhaps as odd a party as
had crossed the caralain grass anytime recently, four of them women, and
one of the men in a litter slung between two horses. the litter horses carried
light packs, as well, with supplies for the long stretches between villages the
way they had come.
six people, egwene thought, and how many secrets? they all shared more
than one, secrets that would have to be kept, perhaps, even in the white
tower. life was simpler back home.
nynaeve, do you think rand is all right? and perrin? she added hastily.
she could not afford to pretend any longer that one day she would marry
rand; pretending would be all it was, now. she did not like thatshe was not
entirely reconciled to itbut she knew it.
your dreams? have they been troubling you again? nynaeve sounded
concerned, but egwene was in no mood to accept sympathy.
she made her voice sound as everyday as she could manage. from the
rumors we heard, i cant tell what might be going on. they have everything i
know about so twisted, so wrong.
everything has been wrong since moiraine came into our lives, nynaeve
said brusquely. perrin and rand. . . . she hesitated, grimacing. egwene
thought nynaeve believed everything that rand had become was moiraines
doing. they will have to take care of themselves for now. im afraid we have
something to worry about ourselves. something is not right. i can . . . feel it.
do you know what? egwene asked.
it feels almost like a storm. nynaeves dark eyes studied the morning
sky, clear and blue, with only a few scattered white clouds, and she shook her
head again. like a storm coming. nynaeve had always been able to foretell
the weather. listening to the wind, it was called, and the wisdom of every
village was expected to do it, though many really could not. yet since leaving
emonds field, nynaeves ability had grown, or changed. the storms she felt
sometimes had to do with men rather than wind, now.
egwene bit her underlip, thinking. they could not afford to be stopped or


 slowed, not after coming so far, not so close to tar valon. for mats sake, and
for reasons that her mind might tell her were more important than the life of
one village youth, one childhood friend, but that her heart could not rate so
high. she looked at the others, wondering if any of them had noticed
something.
verin sedai, short and plump and all in shades of brown, rode apparently
lost in thought, the hood of her cloak pulled forward till it all but hid her face,
in the lead but letting her horse amble at its own pace. she was of the brown
ajah, and the brown sisters usually cared more for seeking out knowledge
than for anything in the world around them. egwene was not so sure of
verins detachment, though. verin had put herself hipdeep in the affairs of
the world by being with them.
elayne, of an age with egwene and also a novice, but goldenhaired and
blueeyed where egwene was dark, rode back beside the litter where mat lay
unconscious. in the same gray as egwene and nynaeve, she was watching
him with the worry they all felt. mat had not roused in three days, now. the
lean, longhaired man riding on the other side of the litter seemed to be trying
to look everywhere without anyone noticing, and the lines of his face had
deepened in concentration.
hurin, egwene said, and nynaeve nodded. they slowed to let the litter
catch up to them. verin ambled on ahead.
do you sense something, hurin? nynaeve asked. elayne lifted her eyes,
suddenly intent, from mats litter.
with the three of them looking at him, the lean man shifted in his saddle
and rubbed the side of his long nose. trouble, he said, curt and reluctant at
the same time. i think maybe . . . trouble.
a thieftaker for the king of shienar, he did not wear a shienaran warriors
topknot, yet the short sword and notched swordbreaker at his belt were worn
with use. years of experience seemed to have given him some talent at
sniffing out wrongdoers, especially those who had done violence.
twice on the journey he had advised them to leave a village after being
there less than an hour. the first time, they had all refused, saying they were
too tired, but before the night was done the innkeeper and two other men of
the village had tried to murder them in their beds. they were only simple
thieves, not darkfriends, just greedy for the horses and whatever they had in
their saddlebags and bundles. but the rest of the village knew of it, and
apparently considered strangers fair gleanings. they had been forced to flee a


 mob waving axe handles and pitchforks. the second time, verin ordered them
to ride on as soon as hurin spoke.
but the thieftaker was always wary when talking to any of his
companions. except mat, back when mat could talk; the two of them had
joked and played at dice, when the women were not too close at hand.
egwene thought he might be uneasy at being alone, for all practical purposes,
with an aes sedai and three women in training for sisterhood. some men
found facing a fight easier than facing aes sedai.
what kind of trouble? elayne said.
she spoke easily, but with such a clear note of expecting to be answered,
immediately and in detail, that hurin opened his mouth. i smell he cut
himself short and blinked as if surprised, eyes darting from one woman to
another. just a feeling, he said finally. a . . . a hunch. ive seen some
tracks, yesterday, and today. a lot of horses. twenty or thirty going this way,
twenty or thirty that. it makes me wonder. thats all. a feeling. but i say its
trouble.
tracks? egwene had not noticed them. nynaeve said sharply, i did not see
anything worrisome in them. nynaeve prided herself on being as good a
tracker as any man. they were days old. what makes you think they are
trouble?
i just think they are, hurin said slowly, as if he wanted to say more. he
dropped his eyes, rubbing at his nose and inhaling deeply. its been a long
time since we saw a village, he muttered. who knows what news from
falme has come before us? we might not find so good a welcome as we
expect. im thinking these men could be brigands, killers. we should be wary,
im thinking. if mat was on his feet, id scout ahead, but maybe its best i
dont leave you alone.
nynaeves eyebrows lifted. do you believe we cannot look after
ourselves?
the one power wont do you much good if somebody kills you before
you can use it, hurin said, addressing the tall pommel of his saddle.
begging your pardon, but i think i. . . . ill just ride up with verin sedai for a
time. he dug in his heels and galloped forward before any of them could
speak again.
now that is a surprise, elayne said as hurin slowed a little distance from
the brown sister. verin did not seem to notice him any more than she noticed
anything else, and he appeared content to leave it so. he has been staying as


 far from verin as he could ever since we left toman head. he always looks at
her as if hes afraid of what she might say.
respecting aes sedai doesnt mean he is not afraid of them, nynaeve
said, then added, reluctantly, of us.
if he thinks there might be trouble, we ought to send him out scouting.
egwene took a deep breath and gave the other two women as level a look as
she could manage. if there is trouble, we can defend ourselves better than he
could with a hundred soldiers to help him.
he doesnt know that, nynaeve said flatly, and i am not about to tell
him. or anyone else.
i can imagine what verin would have to say about it. elayne sounded
anxious. i wish i had some idea how much she does know. egwene, i dont
know if my mother could help me if the amyrlin found out, much less help
the pair of you. or even whether she would try. elaynes mother was queen
of andor. she was only able to learn a little of the power before she left the
white tower, for all she has lived as if she had been raised to full sister.
we cannot hope to rely on morgase, nynaeve said. she is in caemlyn,
and we will be in tar valon. no, we may be in enough trouble already for
going off as we did, no matter what weve brought back. it will be best if we
stay low, behave humbly, and do nothing to attract more attention than we
already have.
another time, egwene would have laughed at the idea of nynaeve
pretending to be humble. even elayne managed a better job of it. but at
present she did not feel like laughing. and if hurin is right? if we are
attacked? he cannot defend us against twenty or thirty men, and we might be
dead if we wait for verin to do something. you said you sense a storm,
nynaeve.
you do? elayne said. redgold curls swung as she shook her head.
verin will not like it if we. . . . she trailed off. whatever verin likes or
doesnt like, we may have to.
i will do what must be done, nynaeve said sharply, if there is anything
to be done, and you two will run, if need be. the white tower may be all
abuzz with your potential, but dont think they will not still you both if the
amyrlin seat or the hall of the tower decides it is necessary.
elayne swallowed hard. if they would still us for it, she said in a faint
voice, they would still you, too. we should all run together; or act together.


 hurin has been right before. if we want to live to be in trouble in the tower,
we may have to . . . to do what we must.
egwene shivered. stilled. cut off from saidar, the female half of the true
source. few aes sedai had ever incurred that penalty, yet there were deeds
for which the tower demanded stilling. novices were required to learn the
names of every aes sedai who had ever been stilled, and their crimes.
she could always feel the source there, now, just out of sight, like the sun
at noon over her shoulder. if she often caught nothing when she tried to touch
saidar, she still wanted to touch it. the more she touched it, the more she
wanted to, all the time, no matter what sheriam sedai, the mistress of
novices, said about the dangers of growing too fond of the feel of the one
power. to be cut off from it; still able to sense saidar, but never to touch it
again. . . .
neither of the others seemed to want to talk, either.
to cover her shaking, she bent from her saddle to the gently swaying litter.
mats blankets had become disarrayed, exposing a curved dagger in a golden
sheath clutched in one hand, a ruby the size of a pigeons egg capping the hilt.
careful not to touch the dagger, she eased the blankets back over his hand. he
was only a few years older than she, but gaunt cheeks and sallow skin had
aged him. his chest barely moved as he breathed hoarsely. a lumpy leather
sack lay at his feet. she shifted the blanket to cover that, too. we have to get
mat to the tower, she thought. and the sack.
nynaeve leaned down as well, and felt mats forehead. his fever is
worse. she sounded worried. if only i had some worrynot root or
feverbane.
perhaps if verin tried healing again, elayne said.
nynaeve shook her head. she smoothed mats hair back and sighed, then
straightened before speaking. she says it is all she can do to keep him alive,
now, and i believe her. ii tried healing last night myself, but nothing
happened.
elayne gasped. sheriam sedai says we mustnt try to heal until weve
been guided step by step a hundred times.
you could have killed him, egwene said sharply.
nynaeve sniffed loudly. i was healing before i ever thought of going to
tar valon, even if i didnt know i was. but it seems i need my medicines to
make it work for me. if i only had some feverbane. i do not think he has much


 time left. hours, maybe.
egwene thought she sounded almost as unhappy about knowing, about how
she knew, as she did about mat. she wondered again why nynaeve had
chosen to go to tar valon for training at all. she had learned to channel
unknowingly, even if she could not always control the act, and had passed the
crisis that killed three out of four women who learned without aes sedai
guidance. nynaeve said she wanted to learn more, but often she was as
reluctant about it as a child being dosed with sheepstongue root.
we will have him in the white tower soon, egwene said. they can
heal him there. the amyrlin will take care of him. she will take care of
everything. she did not look at where mats blanket covered the sack at his
feet. the other two women were studiously not looking at it, either. there
were some secrets they would all be relieved to shed.
riders, nynaeve said suddenly, but egwene had already seen them. two
dozen men appearing over a low rise ahead, white cloaks flapping as they
galloped, angling toward them.
children of the light, elayne said, like a curse. i think we have found
your storm, and hurins trouble.
verin had pulled up, a hand on hurins arm to stop him drawing his sword.
egwene touched the lead litter horse to stop it just behind the plump aes
sedai.
let me do all the talking, children, the aes sedai said placidly, pushing
her cowl back to reveal gray in her hair. egwene was not sure how old verin
was; she thought old enough to be a grandmother, but the gray streaks were
the aes sedais only signs of age. and whatever you do, do not allow them
to make you angry.
verins face was as calm as her voice, but egwene thought she saw the aes
sedai measuring the distance to tar valon. the tops of the towers were
visible now, and a high bridge arching over the river to the island, tall enough
for the trading ships that plied the river to sail beneath.
close enough to see, egwene thought, but too far to do any good.
for a moment she was sure the oncoming whitecloaks meant to charge
them, but their leader raised a hand and they abruptly drew rein a scant forty
paces off, scattering dust and dirt ahead of them.
nynaeve muttered angrily under her breath, and elayne sat straight and full
of pride, appearing likely to berate the whitecloaks for ill manners. hurin still


 had a grip on his sword hilt; he looked ready to put himself between the
women and the whitecloaks no matter what verin said. verin mildly waved a
hand in front of her face to dispel the dust. the whitecloaked riders spread
out in an arc, blocking the way firmly.
their breastplates and conical helmets shone from polishing, and even the
mail on their arms gleamed brightly. each man had the flaring, golden sun on
his breast. some fitted arrows to bows, which they did not raise, but held
ready. their leader was a young man, yet he wore two golden knots of rank
beneath the sunburst on his cloak.
two tar valon witches, unless i miss my guess, yes? he said with a tight
smile that pinched his narrow face. arrogance brightened his eyes, as if he
knew some truth others were too stupid to see. and two nits, and a pair of
lapdogs, one sick and one old. hurin bristled, but verins hand restrained
him. where do you come from? the whitecloak demanded.
we come from the west, verin said placidly. move out of our way, and
let us continue. the children of the light have no authority here.
the children have authority wherever the light is, witch, and where the
light is not, we bring it. answer my questions! or must i take you to our
camp and let the questioners ask?
mat could not afford any more delay in reaching help in the white tower.
and more importantlyegwene winced to think of it that waymore
importantly, they could not let the contents of that sack fall into whitecloak
hands.
i have answered you, verin said, still calm, and more politely than you
deserve. do you really believe you can stop us? some of the whitecloaks
raised their bows as if she had uttered a threat, but she went on, her voice
never rising. in some lands you may hold sway by your threats, but not here,
in sight of tar valon. can you truly believe that in this place, you will be
allowed to carry off aes sedai?
the officer shifted uneasily in his saddle, as though suddenly doubting
whether he could back up his words. then he glanced back at his meneither
to remind himself of their support or because he had remembered they were
watchingand with that he took himself in hand. i have no fear of your
darkfriend ways, witch. answer me, or answer the questioners. he did not
sound as forceful as he had.
verin opened her mouth as if for idle conversation, but before she could
speak, elayne jumped in, voice ringing with command. i am elayne,


 daughterheir of andor. if you do not move aside at once, you will have
queen morgase to answer to, whitecloak! verin hissed with vexation.
the whitecloak looked taken aback for an instant, but then he laughed.
you think it so, yes? perhaps you will discover morgase no longer has so
much love for witches, girl. if i take you from them and return you to her
side, she will thank me for it. lord captain eamon valda would like very
much to speak to you, daughterheir of andor. he raised a hand, whether to
gesture or signal his men, egwene could not say. some of the whitecloaks
gathered their reins.
theres no more time to wait, egwene thought. i will not be chained again!
she opened herself to the one power. it was a simple exercise, and after long
practice, it went much more swiftly than the first time she had tried. in a
heartbeat her mind emptied of everything, everything but a single rosebud,
floating in emptiness. she was the rosebud, opening to the light, opening to
saidar, the female half of the true source. the power flooded her, threatening
to sweep her away. it was like being filled with light, with the light, like
being one with the light, a glorious ecstasy. she fought to keep from being
overwhelmed, and focused on the ground in front of the whitecloak officers
horse. a small patch of ground; she did not want to kill anyone. you will not
take me!
the mans hand was still going up. with a roar the ground in front of him
erupted in a narrow fountain of dirt and rocks higher than his head.
screaming, his horse reared, and he rolled out of his saddle like a sack.
before he hit the ground, egwene shifted her focus closer to the other
whitecloaks, and the ground threw up another small explosion. bela danced
sideways, but she controlled the mare with reins and knees without even
thinking of it. wrapped inside emptiness, she was still surprised at a third
eruption, not of her making, and a fourth. distantly, she was aware of
nynaeve and elayne, both enveloped in the glow that said they, too, had
embraced saidar, had been embraced by it. that aura would not be visible to
any but another woman who could channel, but the results were visible to all.
explosions harried the whitecloaks on every side, showering them with dirt,
shaking them with noise, sending their horses plunging wildly.
hurin stared around him, mouth open and obviously as frightened as the
whitecloaks, as he tried to keep the litter horses and his own mount from
bolting. verin was wideeyed with astonishment and anger. her mouth
worked furiously, but whatever she might be saying was lost in the thunder.


 and then the whitecloaks were running away, some dropping their bows in
panic, galloping as if the dark one himself were at their backs. all but the
young officer, who was picking himself up off the ground. shoulders
hunched, he stared at verin, the whites of his eyes showing all the way
round. dust stained his fine white cloak, and his face, but he did not seem to
notice. kill me, then, witch, he said shakily. go ahead. kill me, as you
killed my father!
the aes sedai ignored him. her attention was all on her companions. as if
they, too, had forgotten their officer, the fleeing whitecloaks vanished over
the same rise where they had first appeared, all in a body and none looking
back. the officers horse ran with them.
under verins furious gaze, egwene let go of saidar, slowly, unwillingly. it
was always hard, letting go. even more slowly, the glow around nynaeve
vanished. nynaeve was frowning hard at the pinchfaced whitecloak before
them, as if he might still be capable of some sort of trickery. elayne looked
shocked by what she had done.
what you have done, verin began, then stopped to take a deep breath.
her stare took in all three of the younger women. what you have done is an
abomination. an abomination! an aes sedai does not use the power as a
weapon except against shadowspawn, or in the last extreme to defend her
life. the three oaths
they were ready to kill us, nynaeve broke in heatedly. kill us, or carry
us off to be tortured. he was giving the order.
it . . . it was not really using the power as a weapon, verin sedai. elayne
held her chin high, but her voice shook. we did not hurt anyone, or even try
to hurt anyone. surely
do not split hairs with me! verin snapped. when you become full aes
sedaiif you ever become full aes sedai!you will be bound to obey the
three oaths, but even novices are expected to do their best to live as if
already bound.
what about him? nynaeve gestured to the whitecloak officer, still
standing there and looking stunned. her face was as tight as a drum; she
seemed almost as angry as the aes sedai. he was about to take us prisoner.
mat will die if he doesnt reach the tower soon, and . . . and. . . .
egwene knew what nynaeve was struggling not to say aloud. and we cant
let that sack fall into any hands but the amyrlins.


 verin regarded the whitecloak wearily. he was only trying to bully us,
child. he knew very well he could not make us go where we did not want, not
without more trouble than he was willing to accept. not here, not in sight of
tar valon. i could have talked us past him, with a little time and a little
patience. oh, he might well have tried to kill us if he could have done it from
hiding, but no whitecloak with the brains of a goat will try harming an aes
sedai who knows he is there. see what you have done! what stories will
those men tell, and what harm will it do?
the officers face had reddened when she mentioned hiding. it is no
cowardice not to charge the powers that broke the world, he burst out. you
witches want to break the world again, in the service of the dark one! verin
shook her head in tired disbelief.
egwene wished she could mend some of the damage she had done. i am
very sorry for what i did, she told the officer. she was glad she was not
bound to speak no word that was not true, as full aes sedai were, because
what she had said was only half true at best. i should not have, and i
apologize. i am sure verin sedai will heal your bruises. he stepped back as
if she had offered to have him skinned alive, and verin sniffed loudly. we
have come a long way, egwene went on, all the way from toman head, and
if i werent so tired, i would never have
be quiet, girl! verin shouted at the same time the whitecloak snarled,
toman head? falme! you were at falme! he stumbled back another step
and half drew his sword. from the look on his face, egwene did not know
whether he meant to attack, or to defend himself. hurin moved his horse
closer to the whitecloak, a hand on his swordbreaker, but the narrowfaced
man went on in a rant, spittle flying with his fury. my father died at falme!
byar told me! you witches killed him for your false dragon! ill see you dead
for it! i will see you burn!
impetuous children, verin sighed. almost as bad as boys for letting your
mouths run away with you. go with the light, my son, she told the
whitecloak.
without another word, she guided them around the man, but his shouts
followed after. my name is dain bornhald! remember it, darkfriends! i will
make you fear my name! remember my name!
as bornhalds shouts faded behind them, they rode in silence for a time.
finally, egwene said to no one in particular, i was only trying to make things
better.


 better! verin muttered. you must learn there is a time to speak all of the
truth, and a time to govern your tongue. the least of the lessons you must
learn, but important, if you mean to live long enough to wear the shawl of a
full sister. did it never occur to you that word of falme might have come
ahead of us?
why should it have occurred to her? nynaeve asked. no one weve met
before this had heard more than rumors, if that, and we have outrun even
rumor in the last month.
and all word has to come along the same roads we used? verin replied.
we have moved slowly. rumor takes wing along a hundred paths. always
plan for the worst, child; that way, all your surprises will be pleasant ones.
what did he mean about my mother? elayne said suddenly. he must
have been lying. she would never turn against tar valon.
the queens of andor have always been friends to tar valon, but all
things change. verins face was calm again, yet there was a tightness in her
voice. she turned in her saddle to look over them, the three young women,
hurin, mat in the litter. the world is strange, and all things change. they
capped the ridge; a village was in sight ahead of them now, yellow tile roofs
clustered around the great bridge that led to tar valon. now you must truly
be on your guard, verin told them. now the real danger begins.


 c h a p t e r
1 1


tar valon


the small village of darein had lain beside the river erinin almost as long
as tar valon had occupied its island. dareins small, red and brown brick
houses and shops, its stonepaved streets, gave a feel of permanence, but the
village had been burned in the trolloc wars, sacked when artur hawkwings
armies besieged tar valon, looted more than once during the war of the
hundred years, and put to the torch again in the aiel war, not quite twenty
years before. an unquiet history for a little village, but dareins place, at the
foot of one of the bridges leading out to tar valon, ensured it would always
be rebuilt, however many times it was destroyed. so long as tar valon stood,
at least.
at first it seemed to egwene that darein was expecting war again. a square
of pikemen marched along the streets, ranks and files bristling like a carding
comb, followed by bowmen in flat, rimmed helmets, with filled quivers riding
at their hips and bows slanted across their chests. a squadron of armored
horsemen, faces hidden behind the steel bars of their helmets, gave way to
verin and her party at a wave of their officers gauntleted hand. all wore the
white flame of tar valon, like a snowy teardrop, on their breasts.
yet townspeople went about their business with apparent unconcern, the
market throng dividing around the soldiers as if marching men were
obstructions they were long used to. a few men and women carrying trays of
fruit kept pace with the soldiers, trying to interest them in wrinkled apples and
pears pulled from winter cellars, but aside from those few, shopkeepers and
hawkers alike paid the soldiers no mind. verin seemingly ignored them, too,
as she led egwene and the others through the village to the great bridge,
arching over half a mile or more of water like lace woven from stone.


 at the foot of the bridge more soldiers stood guard, a dozen pikemen and
half that many archers, checking everyone who wanted to cross. their officer,
a balding man with his helmet hanging on his sword hilt, looked harassed by
the waiting line of people afoot and on horseback, people with carts drawn by
oxen or horses or the owner. the line was only a hundred paces long, but
every time one was let onto the bridge, another joined the far end. just the
same, the balding man seemed to be taking his time about making sure each
one had a right to enter tar valon before he let them go.
he opened his mouth angrily when verin led her party to the head of the
line, then caught a good look at her face and hurriedly stuffed his helmet onto
his head. no one who really knew them needed a great serpent ring to
identify aes sedai. good morrow to you, aes sedai, he said, bowing with a
hand to his heart. good morrow. go right across, if it please you.
verin reined in beside him. a murmur rose from the waiting line, but no
one voiced a complaint aloud. trouble from the whitecloaks, guardsman?
why are we stopping? egwene wondered urgently. has she forgotten
about mat?
not really, aes sedai, the officer said. no fighting. they tried to move
into eldone market, the other side of the river, but we showed them better.
the amyrlin means to make sure they dont try again.
verin sedai, egwene began carefully, mat
in a moment, child, the aes sedai said, sounding only halfway
absentminded. i have not forgotten him. her attention went right back to the
officer. and the outlying villages?
the man shrugged uncomfortably. we cant keep the whitecloaks out,
aes sedai, but they move off when our patrols ride in. they seem to be trying
to goad us. verin nodded, and would have ridden on, but the officer spoke
again. pardon, aes sedai, but youve obviously come from a distance. have
you any news? fresh rumors come upriver with every trading vessel. they
say theres a new false dragon out west somewhere. why, they even say he
has artur hawkwings armies, back from the dead, following him, and that he
killed a lot of whitecloaks and destroyed a cityfalme, they call itin
tarabon, some say.
they say aes sedai helped him! a mans voice shouted from the waiting
line. hurin breathed deeply, and shifted himself as if he expected violence.
egwene looked round, but there was no sign of whoever had shouted.


 everyone appeared to be concerned only with waiting, patiently or
impatiently, for his turn to cross. things had changed, and not for the better.
when she had left tar valon, any man who spoke against aes sedai would
have been lucky to escape with a punch in the nose from whoever overheard.
red in the face, the officer was glaring down the line.
rumors are seldom true, verin told him. i can tell you that falme still
stands. it isnt even in tarabon, guardsman. listen less to rumor, and more to
the amyrlin seat. the light shine on you. she lifted her reins, and he bowed
as she led the others past him.
the bridge struck egwene with wonder, as the bridges of tar valon always
did. the openwork walls looked intricate enough to tax the best craftswoman
at her laceframe. it hardly seemed that such could have been done with stone,
or that it could stand even its own weight. the river rolled, strong and steady,
fifty paces or more below, and for all that half mile the bridge flowed
unsupported from riverbank to island.
even more wondrous, in its own way, was the feeling that the bridge was
taking her home. more wondrous, and shocking. emonds field is my home.
but it was in tar valon that she would learn what she must to keep her alive,
to keep her free. it was in tar valon that she would learnmust learnwhy
her dreams disturbed her so, and why they sometimes seemed to have
meanings she could not puzzle out. tar valon was where her life was tied,
now. if she ever returned to emonds fieldthe if hurt, but she had to be
honestif she returned, it would be to visit, to see her parents. she had
already gone beyond being an innkeepers daughter. those bonds would not
hold her again, either, not because she hated them, but because she had
outgrown them.
the bridge was only the beginning. it arched straight to the walls that
surrounded the island, high walls of gleaming white, silverstreaked stone,
whose tops looked down on the bridges height. at intervals, guard towers
interrupted the walls, of the same white stone, their massive footings washed
by the river. but above the walls and beyond rose the true towers of tar
valon, the towers of story, pointed spires and flutes and spirals, some
connected by airy bridges a good hundred paces or more above the ground.
and still only the beginning.
there were no guards on the bronzeclad gates, and they stood wide
enough for twenty abreast to ride through, opening onto one of the broad
avenues that crisscrossed the island. spring might barely have come, but the
air already smelled of flowers and perfumes and spices.


 the city took egwenes breath as if she had never seen it before. every
square and street crossing had its fountain, or its monument or statue, some
atop great columns as high as towers, but it was the city itself that dazzled the
eye. what was plain in form might have so many ornaments and carvings that
it seemed an ornament itself, or, lacking decoration, used its form alone for
grandeur. great buildings and small, in stone of every color, looking like
shells, or waves, or windsculpted cliffs, flowing and fanciful, captured from
nature or the flights of mens minds. the dwellings, the inns, the very stables
even the most insignificant buildings in tar valon had been made for
beauty. ogier stonemasons had built most of the city in the long years after
the breaking of the world, and they maintained it had been their finest work.
men and women of every nation thronged the streets. they were dark of
skin, and pale, and everything in between, their garments in bright colors and
patterns, or drab, but decked with fringes and braids and shining buttons, or
stark and severe; showing more skin than egwene thought proper, or
revealing nothing but eyes and fingertips. sedan chairs and litters wove
through the crowds, the trotting bearers crying give way! closed carriages
inched along, liveried coachmen shouting hiya! and ho! as if they
believed they might achieve more than a walk. street musicians played flute
or harp or pipes, sometimes accompanying a juggler or an acrobat, always
with a cap set out for coins. wandering hawkers cried their wares, and
shopkeepers standing in front of their shops shouted the excellence of their
goods. a hum filled the city like the song of a thing alive.
verin had pulled her cowl back up, hiding her face. no one seemed to be
paying them any mind in these crowds, egwene thought. not even mat in his
horse litter drew a second glance, though some folk did edge away from it as
they hurried past. people sometimes brought their sick to the white tower for
healing, and whatever he had might be catching.
egwene rode up beside verin and leaned close. do you really expect
trouble now? we are in the city. we are almost there. the white tower stood
in plain sight now, the great building gleaming broad and tall above the
rooftops.
i always expect trouble, verin replied placidly, and so should you. in the
tower most of all. you must all of you be more careful than ever, now. your
. . . tricksher mouth tightened for an instant before serenity returned
frightened away the whitecloaks, but inside the tower they may well
bring you death or stilling.
i would not do that in the tower, egwene protested. none of us would.


 nynaeve and elayne had joined them, leaving hurin to mind the litter horses.
they nodded, elayne fervently, and nynaeve, it seemed to egwene, as if she
had reservations.
you should not do it ever again, child. you must not! ever! verin eyed
them sideways round the edge of her cowl, and shook her head. and i truly
hope you have learned the folly of speaking when you should be silent.
elaynes face went crimson, and egwenes cheeks grew hot. once we enter
the tower grounds, hold your tongues and accept whatever happens.
whatever happens! you know nothing of what awaits us in the tower, and if
you did, you would not know how to handle it. so be silent.
i will do as you say, verin sedai, egwene said, and elayne echoed her.
nynaeve sniffed. the aes sedai stared at her, and she nodded reluctantly.
the street opened into a vast square, centered in the city, and in the middle
of the square stood the white tower, shining in the sun, rising until it seemed
to touch the sky from a palace of domes and delicate spires and other shapes
surrounded by the tower grounds. there were surprisingly few people in the
square. no one intruded on the tower unless he had business there, egwene
reminded herself uneasily.
hurin led the horse litter forward as they entered the square. verin sedai, i
must leave you now. he eyed the tower once, then managed not to look at it
again, though it was hard to look at anything else. hurin came from a land
where aes sedai were respected, but it was one thing to respect them and
quite another to be surrounded by them.
you have been a great help on our journey, hurin, verin told him, and a
long journey it has been. there will be a place in the tower for you to rest
before you travel on.
hurin shook his head emphatically. i cannot waste a day, verin sedai. not
another hour. i must return to shienar, to tell king easar, and lord agelmar,
the truth of what happened at falme. i must tell them about he cut off
abruptly and looked around. there was no one close enough to overhear, but
he still lowered his voice and said only, about rand. that the dragon is
reborn. there must be trading ships heading upriver, and i mean to be on the
next to sail.
go in the light, then, hurin of shienar, verin said.
the light illumine all of you, he replied, gathering his reins. yet he
hesitated a moment, then added, if you need meeversend word to fal
dara, and ill find a way to come. clearing his throat as if embarrassed, he


 turned his horse and trotted away, heading beyond the tower. all too soon he
was lost to sight.
nynaeve gave an exasperated shake of her head. men! they always say to
send for them if you need them, but when you do need one, you need him
right then.
no man can help where we are going now, verin said dryly. remember.
be silent.
egwene felt a sense of loss with hurins going. he would barely talk to any
of them, except mat, and verin was right. he was only a man, and helpless as
a babe when it came to facing whatever might await them in the tower. yet
his leaving made their number one less, and she could never help thinking
that a man with a sword was useful to have around. and he had been a link to
rand, and perrin. i have my own troubles to worry about. rand and perrin
would have to make do with moiraine to look after them. and min will
certainly look after rand, she thought with a flash of jealousy that she tried to
suppress. she almost succeeded.
with a sigh, she took up the lead of the horse litter. mat lay bundled to his
chin; his breathing was a dry rasp. soon, she thought. youll be healed soon,
now. and well find out whats waiting for us. she wished verin would stop
trying to frighten them. she wished she did not think verin had reason to
frighten them.
verin took them around the tower grounds to a small side gate that stood
open, with two guards. pausing, the aes sedai pushed back her cowl and
leaned from her saddle to speak softly to one of the men. he gave a start, and
a surprised look at egwene and the others. with a quick, as you command,
aes sedai, he took off into the grounds at a run. verin was already riding
through the gates as he spoke. she rode as if there were no hurry.
egwene followed with the litter, exchanging glances with nynaeve and
elayne, wondering what verin had told the man.
a gray stone guardhouse stood just inside the gate, shaped like a sixpointed star lying on its side. a small knot of guards lounged in the doorway;
they left off talking and bowed as verin rode past.
this part of the tower grounds could have been some lords park, with
trees and pruned shrubs and wide graveled paths. other buildings were visible
through the trees, and the tower itself loomed over everything.
the path led them to a stableyard among the trees, where grooms in leather


 vests came running to take their horses. at the aes sedais direction, some of
the grooms unfastened the litter and set it gently off to one side. as the horses
were led away into the stable, verin took the leather sack from mats feet and
tucked it carelessly under one arm.
nynaeve paused in knuckling her back and frowned at the aes sedai. you
said he has hours, perhaps. are you just going to
verin held up a hand, but whether it was the gesture that stopped nynaeve
or the crunch of feet approaching on gravel, egwene could not say.
in a moment sheriam sedai appeared, followed by three of the accepted,
their white dresses ringed at the hem with the colors of all seven ajahs from
blue to red, and two husky men in rough, laborers coats. the mistress of
novices was a slightly plump woman, with the high cheekbones that were
common in saldaea. flamered hair and clear, tilted green eyes made her
smooth aes sedai features striking. she eyed egwene and the others calmly,
but her mouth was tight.
so you have brought back our three runaways, verin. with everything that
happened, i could almost wish you had not.
we did not egwene began, but verin cut her off with a sharp, be
silent! verin stared at herat each of the three of themas if the intensity
of her look could hold their mouths shut.
egwene was sure that, for her part, it could. she had never seen verin angry
before. nynaeve crossed her arms beneath her breasts and muttered under her
breath, but she said nothing. the three accepted behind sheriam kept their
silence, of course, but egwene thought she could see their ears grow from
listening.
when she was certain egwene and the others would remain still, verin
turned back to sheriam. the boy must be taken somewhere away from
everyone. he is ill, dangerously so. dangerous to others as well as to
himself.
i was told you had a litter to be carried. sheriam motioned the two men
to the litter, spoke a quiet word to one, and as quickly as that mat was
whisked away.
egwene opened her mouth to say he needed help now, but at verins stare,
quick and furious, she closed it again. nynaeve was tugging her braid nearly
hard enough to pull it out of her head.
i suppose, verin said, that the whole tower knows we have returned by


 now?
those who do not know, sheriam told her, will know before much
longer. comings and goings have become the first topic of conversation and
gossip. even before falme, and far ahead of the war in cairhien. did you
think to keep it secret?
verin gathered the leather sack in both arms. i must see the amyrlin.
immediately.
and what of these three?
verin considered egwene and her friends, frowning. they must be closely
held until the amyrlin wishes to see them. if she does wish to. closely held,
mind. their own rooms will do, i think. no need for cells. not a word to
anyone.
verin was still speaking to sheriam, but egwene knew the last had been
meant as a reminder to her and the others. nynaeves brows were drawn
down, and she jerked at her braid as if she wanted to hit something. elaynes
blue eyes were open wide, and her face was even paler than usual. egwene
was not sure which feelings she shared, anger or fear or worry. some of all
three, she thought.
with a last, searching glance at her three traveling companions, verin
hurried off, clutching the sack to her chest, cloak flapping behind her.
sheriam put her fists on her hips and studied egwene and the other two. for a
moment egwene felt a lessening of tension. the mistress of novices always
kept a steady temper and a sympathetic sense of humor even when she was
giving you extra chores for breaking the rules.
but sheriams voice was grim when she spoke. not a word, verin sedai
said, and not a word shall it be. if one of you speaksexcept to answer an
aes sedai, of courseill make you wish you had nothing but a switching
and a few hours scrubbing floors to worry about. do you understand me?
yes, aes sedai, egwene said, and heard the other two say the same,
although nynaeve pronounced the words like a challenge.
sheriam made a disgusted sound in her throat, almost a growl. fewer girls
now come to the tower to be trained than once did, but they still come. most
leave never having learned to sense the true source, much less touch it. a
few learn enough not to harm themselves before they go. a bare handful can
aspire to be raised to the accepted, and fewer still to wear the shawl. it is a
hard life, a hard discipline, yet every novice fights to hold on, to attain the


 ring and the shawl. even when they are so afraid they cry themselves to sleep
every night, they struggle to hold on. and you three, who have more ability
born in you than i ever hoped to see in my lifetime, left the tower without
permission, ran away not even halftrained, like irresponsible children, stayed
away for months. and now you ride back in as if nothing has happened, as if
you can take up your training again on the morrow. she let out a long breath
as if she might explode otherwise. faolain!
the three accepted jumped as if they had been caught eavesdropping, and
one, a dark, curlyhaired woman, stepped forward. they were all young
women, but still older than nynaeve. nynaeves rapid acceptance had been
extraordinary. in the normal course of things, it took years as a novice to earn
the great serpent rings they wore, and would take years more before they
could hope to be raised to full aes sedai.
take them to their rooms, sheriam commanded, and keep them there.
they may have bread, cold broth, and water until the amyrlin seat says
otherwise. and if one of them speaks even a word, you may take her to the
kitchens and set her to scrubbing pots. she whirled and stalked away, even
her back expressing anger.
faolain eyed egwene and the others with almost a hopeful air, especially
nynaeve, who wore a glower like a mask. faolains round face held no love
for those who broke the rules so extravagantly, and less for one like nynaeve,
a wilder who had earned her ring without ever being a novice, who had
channeled power before she ever entered tar valon. when it became obvious
that nynaeve meant to keep her anger to herself, faolain shrugged. when
the amyrlin sends for you, youll probably be stilled.
give over, faolain, another of the accepted said. the oldest of the three,
she had a willowy neck and coppery skin, and a graceful way of moving. i
will take you, she told nynaeve. i am called theodrin, and i, too, am a
wilder. i will hold you to sheriam sedais order, but i will not bait you.
come.
nynaeve gave egwene and elayne a worried look, then sighed and let
theodrin lead her away.
wilders, faolain muttered. on her tongue, it sounded like a curse. she
turned her stare to egwene.
the third accepted, a pretty, applecheeked young woman, stationed
herself beside elayne. her mouth was turned up at the corners as if she liked
to smile, but the stern look she gave elayne said she would brook no nonsense


 now.
egwene returned faolains stare with as much calm as she could manage,
and, she hoped, a measure of the haughty, silent contempt that elayne had
adopted. red ajah, she thought. this one will definitely choose the reds. but
it was hard not to think of her own troubles. light, what are they going to do
to us? she meant the aes sedai, the tower, not these women.
well, come along, faolain snapped. its bad enough i have to stand
guard on your door without standing here all day. come along.
taking a deep breath, egwene gripped elaynes hand and followed. light,
let them be healing mat.


 c h a p t e r
1 2


the amyrlin seat


siuan sanche paced the length of her study, pausing now and again to
glance, with a blueeyed gaze that had made rulers stammer, at a carved
nightwood box on a long table centered in the room. she hoped she would not
have to use any of the carefully drawn documents within it. they had been
prepared and sealed in secret, by her own hand, to cover a dozen possible
eventualities. she had laid a warding on the box so that if any hand but hers
opened it, the contents would flash to ash in an instant; very likely the box
itself would burst into flame.
and burn the thieving fisherbird, whoever she might be, so she never
forgets it, i hope, she muttered. for the hundredth time since being told that
verin had returned, she readjusted her stole on her shoulders without realizing
what she was doing. it hung below her waist, broad and striped with the
colors of the seven ajahs. the amyrlin seat was of all ajahs and of none, no
matter from which she had been raised.
the room was ornate, for it had belonged to generations of women who
had worn the stole. the tall fireplace and broad, cold hearth were all carved
golden marble from kandor, and the diamondshaped floor tiles, polished
redstone from the mountains of mist. the walls were panels of some pale
striped wood, hard as iron and carved in fantastic beasts and birds of
unbelievable plumage, panels brought from the lands beyond the aiel waste
by the sea folk before artur hawkwing was born. tall, arched windows,
open now to let in the new, green smells, let onto a balcony overlooking her
small private garden, where she seldom had time to walk.
all that grandeur was in stark contrast to the furnishings siuan sanche had
brought to the room. the one table and the stout chair behind it were plain, if


 well polished with age and beeswax, as was the only other chair in the room.
that stood off to one side, close enough to be drawn up if she wished a visitor
to sit. a small tairen rug lay in front of the table, woven in simple patterns of
blue and brown and gold. a single drawing, tiny fishing boats among reeds,
hung above the fireplace. half a dozen stands held open books about the floor.
that was all. even the lamps would not have been out of place in a farmers
house.
siuan sanche had been born poor in tear, and had worked on her fathers
fishing boat, one just like the boats in the drawing, in the delta called the
fingers of the dragon, before ever she dreamed of coming to tar valon. even
the nearly ten years since she had been raised to the seat had not made her
comfortable with too much luxury. her bedchamber was more simple still.
ten years with the stole, she thought. nearly twenty since i decided to sail
these dangerous waters. and if i slip now, ill wish i were back hauling nets.
she spun at a sound. another aes sedai had slipped into the room, a
copperskinned woman with dark hair cut short. she caught herself in time to
keep her voice steady and say only what was expected. yes, leane?
the keeper of the chronicles bowed, just as deeply as she would had
others been present. the tall aes sedai, as tall as most men, was second only
to the amyrlin in the white tower, and though siuan had known her since
they were novices together, sometimes leanes insistence on upholding the
dignity of the amyrlin seat was enough to make siuan want to scream.
verin is here, mother, asking leave to speak with you. i have told her you
are busy, but she asks
not too busy to speak to her, siuan said. too quickly, she knew, but she
did not care. send her in. theres no need for you to remain, leane. i will
speak to her alone.
a twitch of her eyebrows was the keepers only sign of surprise. the
amyrlin seldom saw anyone, even a queen, without the keeper present. but
the amyrlin was the amyrlin. leane bowed her way out, and in moments
verin took her place, kneeling to kiss the great serpent ring on siuans finger.
the brown sister had a goodsized leather sack under her arm.
thank you for seeing me, mother, verin said as she straightened. i have
urgent news from falme. and more. i scarcely know where to begin.
begin where you will, siuan said. these rooms are warded, in case
anyone thinks to use childhood tricks of eavesdropping. verins eyebrows


 lifted in surprise, and the amyrlin added, much has changed since you left.
speak.
most importantly, then, rand althor has proclaimed himself the dragon
reborn.
siuan felt a tightness loosen in her chest. i hoped it was he, she said
softly. i have had reports from women who could only tell what they had
heard, and rumors by the score come with every traders boat and merchants
wagon, but i could not be sure. she took a deep breath. yet i think i can
name the day it happened. did you know the two false dragons no longer
trouble the world?
i had not heard, mother. that is good news.
yes. mazrim taim is in the hands of our sisters in saldaea, and the poor
fellow in haddon mirk, the light have pity on his soul, was taken by the
tairens and executed on the spot. no one even seems to know what his name
was. both were taken on the same day and, according to rumor, under the
same circumstances. they were in battle, and winning, when suddenly a great
light flashed in the sky, and a vision appeared, just for an instant. there are a
dozen different versions of what it was, but in both cases the result was
exactly the same. the false dragons horse reared up and threw him. he was
knocked unconscious, and his followers cried out that he was dead, and fled
the field, and he was taken. some of my reports speak of visions in the sky at
falme. ill wager a gold mark to a weekold delta perch that was the instant
rand althor proclaimed himself.
the true dragon has been reborn, verin said almost to herself, and so
the pattern has no room for false dragons anymore. we have loosed the
dragon reborn on the world. the light have mercy on us.
the amyrlin shook her head irritably. we have done what must be done.
and if even the newest novice learns of it, i will be stilled before the next
sunrise, if im not torn to pieces first. me, and moiraine, and verin, and likely
anyone thought to be a friend of ours, as well. it was not easy to carry on so
great a conspiracy when only three women knew of it, when even a close
friend would betray them and consider it a duty well done. light, but i wish i
could be sure they would not be right to do it. at least he is safely in
moiraines hands. she will guide him, and do what must be done. what else
have you to tell me, daughter?
for answer, verin placed the leather sack on the table and took out a curled,
gold horn, with silver script inlaid around its flaring bell mouth. she laid the


 horn on the table, then looked to the amyrlin with quiet expectation.
siuan did not have to be close enough to read the script to know what it
said. tia mi aven moridin isainde vadin. the grave is no bar to my call.
the horn of valere? she gasped. you brought that all the way here, across
hundreds of leagues, with the hunters looking everywhere for it? light,
woman, it was to be left with rand althor.
i know, mother, verin said calmly, but the hunters all expect to find the
horn in some great adventure, not in a sack with four women escorting a sick
youth. and it would do rand no good.
what do you mean? he is to fight tarmon gaidon. the horn is to
summon dead heroes from the grave to fight in the last battle. has moiraine
once again made some new plan without consulting me?
this is none of moiraines doing, mother. we plan, but the wheel weaves
the pattern as it wills. rand was not first to sound the horn. matrim cauthon
did that. and mat now lies below, dying of his ties to the shadar logoth
dagger. unless he can be healed here.
siuan shivered. shadar logoth, that dead city so tainted that even trollocs
feared to enter, and with reason. by chance, a dagger from that place had
come into young mats hands, twisting and tainting him with the evil that had
killed the city long ago. killing him. by chance? or by the pattern? he is
taveren, too, after all. but . . . mat sounded the horn. then
so long as mat lives, verin went on, the horn of valere is no more than
a horn to anyone else. if he dies, of course, another can sound it and forge a
new link between man and horn. her gaze was steady and untroubled by
what she seemed to be suggesting.
many will die before we are done, daughter. and who else could i use to
sound it again? ill not take the risk of trying to return it to moiraine, now.
one of the gaidin, perhaps. perhaps. the pattern has yet to make his fate
clear.
yes, mother. and the horn?
for the moment, the amyrlin said finally, we will find some place to
hide this where no one but we two know. i will consider what to do after
that.
verin nodded. as you say, mother. of course, a few hours will make one
decision for you.


 is that all you have for me? siuan snapped. if it is, i have those three
runaways to deal with.
there is the matter of the seanchan, mother.
what of them? all my reports say they have fled back across the ocean, or
to wherever they came from.
it seems so, mother. but i fear we may have to deal with them again.
verin pulled a small leather notebook from behind her belt and began leafing
through it. they spoke of themselves as the forerunners, or those who
come before, and talked of the return, and of reclaiming this land as theirs.
ive taken notes on everything i heard of them. only from those who actually
saw them, of course, or had dealings with them.
verin, you are worrying about a lionfish out in the sea of storms, while
here and now the silverpike are chewing our nets to shreds.
the brown sister continued turning pages. an apt metaphor, mother, the
lionfish. once i saw a large shark that a lionfish had chased into the shallows,
where it died. she tapped one page with a finger. yes. this is the worst.
mother, the seanchan use the one power in battle. they use it as a weapon.
siuan clasped her hands tightly at her waist. the reports the pigeons had
brought spoke of that, too. most had only secondhand knowledge, but a few
women wrote of seeing for themselves. the power used as a weapon. even
dry ink on paper carried an edge of hysteria when they wrote of that. that is
already causing us trouble, verin, and will cause more as the stories spread,
and grow with the spreading. but i can do nothing about that. i am told these
people are gone, daughter. do you have any evidence otherwise?
well, no, mother, but
until you do, let us deal with getting the silverpike out of our nets before
they start chewing holes in the boat, too.
with reluctance, verin closed the notebook and tucked it back behind her
belt. as you say, mother. if i might ask, what do you intend to do to
nynaeve and the other two girls?
the amyrlin hesitated, considering. before i am done with them, they
will wish they could go down to the river and sell themselves for fishbait. it
was the simple truth, but it could be taken in more than one way. now. seat
yourself, and tell me everything those three have said and done in the time
they were with you. everything.


  c h a p t e r
1 3


punishments


lying on her narrow bed, egwene frowned up at the flickering shadows cast
on the ceiling by her single lamp. she wished she could form some plan of
action, or reason out what to expect next. nothing came. the shadows had
more pattern than her thoughts. she could hardly even make herself worry
about mat, yet the shame she felt at that was small, crushed by the walls
around her.
it was a stark, windowless room, like all those in the novices quarters,
small and square and painted white, with pegs on one wall for hanging her
belongings, the bed built against a second, and a tiny shelf on a third, where
in other days she had kept a few books borrowed from the tower library. a
washstand and a threelegged stool completed the furnishings. the
floorboards were almost white from scrubbing. she had done that task, on
hands and knees, every day she had lived there, in addition to her other chores
and lessons. novices lived simply, whether they were innkeepers daughters
or the daughterheir of andor.
she wore the plain white dress of a novice againeven her belt and pouch
were whitebut she felt no joy at having rid herself of the hated gray. her
room had become too much of a prison cell. what if they mean to keep me
here. in this room. like a cell. like a collar and. . . .
she glanced at the doorthe dark accepted would still be standing guard
on the other side, she knewand rolled close to the white plastered wall. just
above the mattress was a small hole, almost invisible unless you knew where
to look, drilled through into the next room by novices long ago. egwene kept
her voice to a whisper.


 elayne? there was no answer. elayne? are you asleep?
how could i sleep? came elaynes reply, a reedy whisper through the
hole. i thought we might be in some trouble, but i did not expect this.
egwene, what are they going to do to us?
egwene had no answer, and her guesses were not of the sort she wanted to
voice aloud. she did not even want to think of them. i actually thought we
might be heroes, elayne. we brought back the horn of valere safely. we
discovered liandrin is black ajah. her voice skipped on that. aes sedai had
always denied the existence of a black ajah, an ajah that served the dark
one, and were known to become angry with anyone who even suggested it
was real. but we know its real. we should be heroes, elayne.
 should and would build no bridges,  elayne said. light, i used to hate
it when mother said that to me, but its true. verin said we mustnt speak of
the horn, or liandrin, to anyone but her or the amyrlin seat. i do not think
any of this will work out the way we thought. it is not fair. weve been
through so much; youve been through so much. it just is not fair.
verin says. moiraine says. i know why people think aes sedai are
puppetmasters. i can almost feel the strings on my arms and legs. whatever
they do, it will be what they decide is good for the white tower, not what is
good or fair for us.
but you still want to be aes sedai. dont you?
egwene hesitated, but there was never any real question as to her answer.
yes, she said. i still do. it is the only way we will ever be safe. but i will
tell you this. ill not let myself be stilled. that was a new thought, voiced as
soon as it came to her, but she realized she did not want to take it back. give
up touching the true source? she could sense it there, even now, the glow
just over her shoulder, the shining just out of sight. she resisted the desire to
reach out to it. give up being filled with the one power, feeling more alive
than i ever have before? i wont! not without a fight.
there was a long silence from the other side of the wall. how could you
stop it? you may be as strong as any of them, now, but neither one of us
knows enough yet to stop even one aes sedai from shielding us from the
source, and there are dozens of them here.
egwene considered. finally she said, i could run away. really run away,
this time.
they would come after us, egwene. im sure they would. once you show


 any ability at all, they dont let you go until youve learned enough not to kill
yourself. or just die from it.
i am not a simple village girl anymore. i have seen something of the
world. i can keep out of aes sedai hands if i want to. she was trying to
convince herself as much as elayne. and what if i dont know enough, yet?
enough about the world, enough about the power? what if just channeling
can still kill me? she refused to think of that. so much i have to learn yet. i
wont let them stop me.
my mother might protect us, elayne said, if what that whitecloak said
is true. i never thought i would hope something like that was the truth. but if
it isnt, mother is just as likely to send us both back in chains. will you teach
me how to live in a village?
egwene blinked at the wall. you will come with me? if it comes to that, i
mean?
there was another long silence, then a faint whisper. i do not want to be
stilled, egwene. i will not be. i will not be!
the door swung open, crashing against the wall, and egwene sat up with a
start. she heard the bang of a door from the other side of the wall. faolain
stepped into egwenes room, smiling as her eyes went to the tiny hole.
similar holes joined most of the novice rooms; any woman who had been a
novice knew of them.
whispering with your friend, eh? the curlyhaired accepted said with
surprising warmth. well, it grows lonely, waiting by yourself. did you have
a nice chat?
egwene opened her mouth, then closed it again hastily. she could answer
aes sedai, sheriam had said. no one else. she regarded the accepted with a
level expression and waited.
the false sympathy slid off faolains face like water running off a roof.
on your feet. the amyrlins not to be kept waiting by the likes of you. you
are lucky i did not come in in time to hear you. move!
novices were supposed to obey the accepted almost as quickly as they
obeyed aes sedai, but egwene got to her feet slowly, and took as much time
as she dared in smoothing her dress. she gave faolain a small curtsy and a
tiny smile. the scowl that rolled across the accepteds face made egwenes
smile grow before she remembered to rein it in; there was no point in pushing
faolain too far. holding herself straight, pretending her knees were not


 shaking, she preceded the accepted out of the room.
elayne was already waiting outside with the applecheeked accepted,
looking fiercely determined to be brave. somehow, she managed to give the
impression that the accepted was a handmaid carrying her gloves. egwene
hoped that she herself was doing half so well.
the railed galleries of the novices quarters rose tier on tier above, in a
hollow column, and fell as many below, to the novices court. there were no
other women in sight. even if every novice in the tower had been there,
though, less than a quarter of the rooms would have been filled. the four of
them walked round the empty galleries and down the spiraling ramps in
silence; none could bear to have the sounds of voices emphasize the
emptiness.
egwene had never before been into the part of the tower where the
amyrlin had her rooms. the corridors there were wide enough for a wagon to
pass down easily, and taller than they were wide. colorful tapestries hung on
the walls, tapestries in a dozen styles, of floral designs and forest scenes, of
heroic deeds and intricate patterns, some so old they looked as if they might
break if handled. their shoes made loud clicks on diamondshaped floor tiles
that repeated the colors of the seven ajahs.
there were few other women in evidencean aes sedai now and then,
sweeping majestically along with no time to notice accepted or novices; five
or six accepted hurrying selfimportantly about their tasks or studies; a
sprinkling of serving women with trays, or mops, or armfuls of sheets or
towels; a few novices moving on errands even more quickly than the servants.
nynaeve and her slimnecked escort, theodrin, joined them. neither spoke.
nynaeve wore an accepteds dress, now, white with the seven colored bands
at the hem, but her belt and pouch were her own. she gave egwene and
elayne each a reassuring smile and a hugegwene was so relieved to see
another friendly face that she returned the hug with barely a thought that
nynaeve was behaving as if she were comforting childrenbut as they
walked on, nynaeve gave her thick braid a sharp tug from time to time, too.
very few men came into that part of the tower, and egwene saw only two:
warders walking side by side in conversation, one with his sword on his hip,
the other with his on his back. one was short and slender, even slight, the
other almost as wide as he was tall, yet both moved with a dangerous grace.
the colorshifting warder cloaks made them queasymaking to watch for
long, parts of them sometimes seeming to fade into the walls beyond. she saw


 nynaeve looking at them, and shook her head. she has to do something about
lan. if any of us can do anything about anyone after today.
the antechamber of the amyrlin seats study was grand enough for any
palace, though the chairs scattered about for those who might wait were plain,
but egwene had eyes only for leane sedai. the keeper wore her narrow stole
of office, blue to show she had been raised from the blue ajah, and her face
could have been carved from smooth, brownish stone. there was no one else
there.
did they give any trouble? the keepers clipped way of talking gave no
hint now of either anger or sympathy.
no, aes sedai, theodrin and the applecheeked accepted said together.
this one had to be pulled by the scruff of her neck, aes sedai, faolain
said, indicating egwene. the accepted sounded indignant. she balks as if
she has forgotten what the discipline of the white tower is.
to lead, leane said, is neither to push nor to pull. go to marris sedai,
faolain, and ask her to allow you to contemplate on this while raking the
paths in the spring garden. she dismissed faolain and the other two
accepted, and they dropped deep curtsies. from the depth of hers, faolain
shot a furious look at egwene.
the keeper paid no attention to the accepteds leaving. instead, she
studied the remaining women, tapping a forefinger against her lips, till
egwene had the feeling they had all been measured to the inch and weighed
to the ounce. nynaeves eyes took on a dangerous sparkle, and she had a tight
grip on her braid.
finally leane raised a hand toward the doors to the amyrlins study. the
great serpent bit its own tail, a pace across, on the dark wood of each.
enter, she said.
nynaeve stepped forward promptly and opened one of the doors. that was
enough to get egwene moving. elayne held her hand tightly, and she gripped
elaynes just as hard. leane followed them in and took a place to one side,
halfway between the three of them and the table in the center of the room.
the amyrlin seat sat behind the table, examining papers. she did not look
up. once nynaeve opened her mouth, but closed it again, at a sharp look from
the keeper. the three of them stood in a line in front of the amyrlins table
and waited. egwene tried not to fidget. long minutes went byit seemed like
hoursbefore the amyrlin raised her head, but when those blue eyes fixed


 them each in turn, egwene decided she could have waited longer. the
amyrlins gaze was like two icicles boring into her heart. the room was cool,
but a trickle of sweat began to run down her back.
so! the amyrlin said finally. our runaways return.
we did not run away, mother. nynaeve was obviously straining for calm,
but her voice shook with emotion. anger, egwene knew. that strong will was
all too often accompanied by anger. liandrin told us we were to go with her,
and the loud crack of the amyrlins hand slapping the table cut her off.
do not invoke liandrins name here, child! the amyrlin snapped. leane
watched them with a stern serenity.
mother, liandrin is black ajah, elayne burst out.
that is known, child. suspected, at least, and as good as known. liandrin
left the tower some months ago, and twelve otherwomenwent with her.
none has been seen since. before they left, they tried to break into the
storeroom where the angreal and saangreal are kept, and did manage to enter
that where the smaller terangreal are stored. they stole a number of those,
including several we do not know the use of.
nynaeve stared at the amyrlin in horror, and elayne suddenly rubbed her
arms as if she were cold. egwene knew she was shivering, too. many times
she had imagined returning to confront liandrin and accuse her, to see her
condemned to some punishmentexcept that she had never managed to
imagine any punishment strong enough to suit that dollfaced aes sedais
crimes. she had even pictured returning to find liandrin already fledin
terror of her return, it was usually. but she had never imagined anything like
this. if liandrin and the othersshe had not really wanted to believe there
were othershad stolen those remnants of the age of legends, there was no
telling what they could do with them. thank the light they did not get any
saangreal, she thought. the other was bad enough.
saangreal were like angreal, allowing an aes sedai to channel more of
the power than she safely could unaided, but far more powerful than angreal,
and rare. terangreal were something different. existing in greater numbers
than either angreal or saangreal, though still not common, they used the one
power rather than helping to channel it, and no one truly understood them.
many would work only for someone who could channel, needing the actual
channeling of the power, while others did what they did for anyone. where all
the angreal and saangreal egwene had ever heard of were small, terangreal
could seemingly be any size. each had apparently been made for a specific


 purpose by those aes sedai of three thousand years ago, to do a certain thing,
and aes sedai since had died trying to learn what; died, or had the ability to
channel burned out of them. there were sisters of the brown ajah who had
made terangreal their lifes study.
some were in use, if likely not for the purposes they had been made. the
stout white rod that the accepted held while taking the three oaths on being
raised to aes sedai was a terangreal, binding them to the oaths as surely as
if they had been bred in the bone. another terangreal was the site of the final
test before a novice was raised to the accepted. there were others, including
many no one could make work at all, and many others that seemed to have no
practical use.
why did they take things no one knows how to use? egwene wondered. or
maybe the black ajah does know. that possibility made her stomach churn.
that might be as bad as saangreal in darkfriend hands.
theft, the amyrlin went on in tones as cold as her eyes, was the least of
what they did. three sisters died that night, as well as two warders, seven
guards, and nine of the servants. murder, done to hide their thieving and their
flight. it may not be proof that they wereblack ajahthe words grated
from her mouthbut i cannot believe otherwise. when there are fish heads
and blood in the water, you dont need to see the silverpike to know they are
there.
then why are we being treated as criminals? nynaeve demanded. we
were tricked by a woman of theof the black ajah. that should be enough
to clear us of any wrongdoing.
the amyrlin barked a mirthless laugh. you think so, do you, child? it may
be your salvation that no one in the tower but verin, leane, and i even
suspects you had anything to do with liandrin. if that were known, much less
the little demonstration you put on for the whitecloaksno need to look so
surprised; verin told me everythingif it were known you had gone off with
liandrin, the hall might very well vote for stilling the three of you before you
could take a breath.
that is not fair! nynaeve said. leane stirred, but nynaeve went on. it is
not right! it!
the amyrlin stood up. that was all, but it cut nynaeve short.
egwene thought she was wise to keep quiet. she had always believed
nynaeve was as strong, as strongwilled, as anyone could be. until she met
the woman wearing the striped stole. please keep your temper, nynaeve. we


 might as well be childrenbabesfacing our mother, and this mother can do
far worse than beat us.
it seemed to her a way out was being offered in what the amyrlin had said,
but she was not sure what way. mother, forgive me for speaking, but what do
you intend to do to us?
do to you, child? i intend to punish you and elayne for leaving the tower
without permission, and nynaeve for leaving the city without permission.
first, you will each be called to sheriam sedais study, where ive told her to
switch you till you wish you had a cushion to sit on for the next week. i have
already had this announced to the novices and the accepted.
egwene blinked in surprise. elayne gave an audible grunt, stiffened her
back, and muttered something under her breath. nynaeve was the only one
who seemed to take it without shock. punishment, whether extra labors or
something else, was always between the mistress of novices and whoever
was called to her. those were usually novices, but included the accepted who
stepped far enough beyond the bounds. sheriam always keeps it between you
and her, egwene thought bleakly. she cant have told everyone. but better
than being imprisoned. better than being stilled.
the announcement is part of the punishment, of course, the amyrlin
went on, as if she had read egwenes mind. i have also had it announced that
you are all three assigned to the kitchens, to work with the scullions, until
further notice. and i have let it be whispered about that further notice might
just mean the rest of your natural lives. do i hear objections to any of this?
no, mother, egwene said quickly. nynaeve would hate scrubbing pots
even more than the other. it could be worse, nynaeve. light, it could be so
much worse. nynaeves nostrils had flared, but she gave her head a tight
shake.
and you, elayne? the amyrlin said. the daughterheir of andor is
used to gentler treatment.
i want to be aes sedai, mother, elayne said in a firm voice.
the amyrlin fingered a paper in front of her on the table and seemed to
study it for a moment. when she raised her head, her smile was not at all
pleasant. if any of you had been silly enough to answer otherwise, i had
something to add to your tally that would have had you cursing your mother
for ever letting your father steal that first kiss. letting yourselves be winkled
out of the tower like thoughtless children. even an infant would never have
fallen into that trap. i will teach you to think before you act, or else ill use


 you to chink cracks in the water gates!
egwene found herself offering silent thanks. a prickle ran over her skin as
the amyrlin continued.
now, as to what else i intend to do with you. it seems you have all
increased your ability to channel remarkably since you left the tower. you
have learned much. including some things, she added sharply, that i intend
to see you unlearn!
nynaeve surprised egwene by saying, i know we have done . . . things . . .
we should not have, mother. i assure you, we will do our best to live as if we
had taken the three oaths.
the amyrlin grunted. see that you do, she said dryly. if i could, id put
the oath rod in your hands tonight, but as that is reserved for being raised to
aes sedai, i must trust to your good senseif you have anyto keep you
whole. as it is, you, egwene, and you, elayne, are to be raised to the
accepted.
elayne gasped, and egwene stammered a shocked, thank you, mother.
leane shifted where she stood. egwene did not think the keeper looked best
pleased. not surprisedshe had obviously known it was comingbut not
pleased, either.
do not thank me. your abilities have gone too far for you to remain
novices. some will think you should not have the ring, not after what youve
done, but the sight of you up to your elbows in greasy pots should mute the
criticism. and lest you start thinking its some sort of reward, remember that
the first few weeks as one of the accepted are used to pick the rotting fish out
of the basket of good ones. your worst day as a novice will seem a fond
dream compared to the least of your studies over the next weeks. i suspect
that some of the sisters who teach you will make your trials even worse than
they strictly must be, but i dont believe you will complain. will you?
i can learn, egwene thought. choose my own studies. i can learn about the
dreams, learn now to . . .
the amyrlins smile cut off her train of thought. that smile said nothing
the sisters could do to them would be worse than it needed to be, if it left
them alive. nynaeves face was a mixture of deep sympathy and horrified
remembrance of her own first weeks as one of the accepted. the combination
was enough to make egwene swallow hard. no, mother, she said faintly.
elaynes reply was a hoarse whisper.


 then thats done. your mother was not at all pleased by your
disappearance, elayne.
she knows? elayne squeaked.
leane sniffed, and the amyrlin arched an eyebrow, saying, i could hardly
keep it from her. you missed her by less than a month, which may be as well
for you. you might not have survived that meeting. she was mad enough to
chew through an oar, at you, at me, at the white tower.
i can imagine, mother, elayne said faintly.
i dont think you can, child. you may have ended a tradition that began
before there was an andor. a custom stronger than most laws. morgase
refused to take elaida back with her. for the first time ever, the queen of
andor does not have an aes sedai advisor. she demanded your immediate
return to caemlyn as soon as you were found. i convinced her it would be
safer for you to train here a little longer. she was ready to remove your two
brothers from their training with the warders, too. they talked their way out
of that themselves. i still do not know how.
elayne seemed to be looking inward, perhaps seeing morgase in all her
anger. she shivered. gawyn is my brother, she said absently. galad is not.
do not be childish, the amyrlin told her. sharing the same father makes
galad your brother, too, whether or not you like him. i will not allow
childishness out of you, girl. a measure of stupidity can be tolerated in a
novice; it is not allowed in one of the accepted.
yes, mother, elayne said glumly.
the queen left a letter for you with sheriam. aside from giving you the
rough side of her tongue, i believe she states her intention of bringing you
home as soon as it is safe for you. she is sure that in a few more months at
most you will be able to channel without risking killing yourself.
but i want to learn, mother. the iron had returned to elaynes voice. i
want to be aes sedai.
the amyrlins smile was even grimmer than her last. as well that you do,
child, because i have no intention of letting morgase have you. you have the
potential to be stronger than any aes sedai in a thousand years, and i will not
let you go until you achieve the shawl as well as the ring. not if i have to
grind you into sausage to do it. i will not let you go. do i make myself clear?
yes, mother. elayne sounded uneasy, and egwene did not blame her.


 caught between morgase and the white tower like a towel between two
dogs, caught between the queen of andor and the amyrlin seat. if egwene
had ever envied elayne her wealth and the throne she would one day occupy,
at that moment she surely did not.
the amyrlin said briskly, leane, take elayne down to sheriams study. i
have a few words yet to say to these other two. words i do not think they will
enjoy hearing.
egwene exchanged startled looks with nynaeve; for a moment, worry
dissolved the tension between them. what does she have to say to us and not
to elayne? she wondered. i do not care, so long as she does not try to stop me
learning. but why not elayne, too?
elayne grimaced at the mention of the mistress of novicess study, but she
drew herself up as leane came to her side. as you command, mother, she
said formally, lowering herself in a perfect curtsy, skirts sweeping wide, so
shall i obey. she followed leane out with her head held high.


 c h a p t e r
1 4


the bite of the thorns


the amyrlin seat did not speak at onceshe walked to the tall, arched
windows and looked out across the balcony at the garden below, hands
clasped tightly behind her. minutes went by before she spoke, still with her
back to the two of them.
i have kept the worst of it from getting out, but how long will that last?
the servants do not know of the stolen terangreal, and they do not connect
the deaths with liandrin and the others leaving. it was not easy to manage
that, gossip being what it is. they believe the deaths were the work of
darkfriends. and so they were. rumors are reaching the city, too. that
darkfriends got into the tower, that they did murder. there was no way to
stop that. it does our reputation no good, but at least it is better than the truth.
at least none outside the tower, and few inside, know aes sedai were killed.
darkfriends in the white tower. faugh! ive spent my life denying that. i will
not let them be here. i will hook them, and gut them, and hang them out in the
sun to dry.
nynaeve gave egwene an uncertain lookhalf as uncertain as egwene felt
then took a deep breath. mother, are we to be punished more? beyond
what youve already sentenced us to?
the amyrlin looked over her shoulder at them; her eyes were lost in
shadow. punished more? you might well say that. some will say ive given
you a gift, raising you. now feel the real bite of that roses thorns. she strode
briskly back to her chair and sat down, then seemed to lose her urgency again.
or to gain uncertainty.
to see the amyrlin look uncertain made egwenes stomach clench. the


 amyrlin seat was always sure, always serenely centered on her path. the
amyrlin was strength personified. for all her own raw power, the woman on
the other side of the table had the knowledge and experience to wind her
around a spindle. to see her suddenly waveringlike a girl who knew she
had to dive head first into a pond without any idea of how deep it was or
whether there were rocks or mud on the bottomto see that, chilled egwene
right to her core. what does she mean, the real bite of the thorns? light, what
does she mean to do to us?
fingering a carved black box on the table in front of her, the amyrlin
peered at it as if looking at something beyond. it is a question of who i can
trust, she said softly. i should be able to trust leane and sheriam, at least.
but do i dare? verin? her shoulders shook with a quick, silent laugh. i
already trust verin with more than my life, but how far can i take it?
moiraine? she was silent for a moment. i have always believed i could trust
moiraine.
egwene shifted uneasily. how much did the amyrlin know? it was not the
kind of thing she could ask, not of the amyrlin seat. do you know that a
young man from my village, a man i used to think id marry one day, is the
dragon reborn? do you know two of your aes sedai are helping him? at
least she was sure the amyrlin did not know she had dreamed of him last
night, running from moiraine. she thought she was sure. she kept silent.
what are you talking about? nynaeve demanded. the amyrlin looked up
at her, and she moderated her tone as she added, forgive me, mother, but are
we to be punished more? i do not understand this talk of trust. if you want my
opinion, moiraine is not to be trusted.
that is your opinion, is it? the amyrlin said. a year out of your village,
and you think you know enough of the world to choose which aes sedai to
trust, and which not? a master sailor whos barely learned to hoist a sail!
she did not mean anything, mother, egwene said, but she knew nynaeve
meant exactly what she had said. she shot a warning glance at nynaeve.
nynaeve gave her braid a sharp tug, but she kept her mouth shut.
well, who is to say, the amyrlin mused. trust is as slippery as a basket
of eels, sometimes. the point is, you two are what i have to work with, thin
reeds though you may be.
nynaeves mouth tightened, though her voice stayed level. thin reeds,
mother?
the amyrlin went on as if she had not spoken. liandrin tried to stuff you


 headfirst into a weir, and it may well be she left because she learned you were
returning, and could unmask her, so i have to believe you arentblack ajah.
i would rather eat scales and entrails, she muttered, but i suppose ill have
to get used to saying that name.
egwene gaped in shockblack ajah? us? light!but nynaeve barked,
we certainly are not! how dare you say such a thing? how dare you even
suggest it?
if you doubt me, child, go ahead! the amyrlin said in a hard voice. you
may have an aes sedais power sometimes, but you are not yet aes sedai, not
by miles. well? speak, if you have more to say. i promise to leave you
weeping for forgiveness! thin reed? ill break you like a reed! ive no
patience left.
nynaeves mouth worked. finally, though, she gave herself a shake, and
drew a calming breath. when she spoke her voice still had an edge, but a
small one. forgive me, mother. but you should notwe are notwe would
not do such a thing.
with a compressed smile, the amyrlin leaned back in her chair. so you
can keep your temper, when you want to. i had to know that. egwene
wondered how much of it had been a test; there was a tightness around the
amyrlins eyes that suggested her patience might well be exhausted. i wish i
could have found a way to raise you to the shawl, daughter. verin says you
are already as strong as any woman in the tower.
the shawl! nynaeve gasped. aes sedai? me?
the amyrlin gestured slightly as if tossing something away, but she looked
regretful to lose it. no point wishing for what cant be. i could hardly raise
you to full sister and send you to scrub pots at the same time. and verin also
says you still cannot channel consciously unless you are furious. i was ready
to sever you from the true source if you even looked like embracing saidar.
the final tests for the shawl require you to channel while maintaining utter
calm under pressure. extreme pressure. even i cannotand would notset
that requirement aside.
nynaeve seemed stunned. she was staring at the amyrlin with her mouth
hanging open.
i dont understand, mother, egwene said after a moment.
i suppose you dont, at that. you are the only two in the tower i can be
absolutely sure are not black ajah. the amyrlins mouth still twisted around


 those words. liandrin and her twelve went, but did all of them go? or did
they leave some of their number behind, like a stub in shallow water that you
dont see till it puts a hole in your boat? it may be ill not find that out until it
is too late, but i will not let liandrin and the others get away with what they
did. not the theft, and especially not the murders. no one kills my people and
walks away unscathed. and ill not let thirteen trained aes sedai serve the
shadow. i mean to find them, and still them!
i dont see what that has to do with us, nynaeve said slowly. she did not
look as if she liked what she was thinking.
just this, child. you two are to be my hounds, hunting the black ajah. no
one will believe it of you, not a pair of halftrained accepted i humiliated
publicly.
that is crazy! nynaeves eyes had opened wide by the time the amyrlin
reached the words black ajah, and her knuckles were white from her grip
on her braid. she bit her words off and spat them: they are all full aes
sedai. egwene hasnt even been raised to accepted yet, and you know i
cannot channel enough to light a candle unless i am angry, not of my own free
will. what chance would we have?
egwene nodded agreement. her tongue had stuck to the roof of her mouth.
hunt the black ajah? id rather hunt a bear with a switch! shes just trying to
scare us, to punish us more. she has to be! if that was what the amyrlin was
trying, she was succeeding all too well.
the amyrlin was nodding, too. every word you say is true. but each of
you is more than a match for liandrin in sheer power, and she is the strongest
of them. yet they are trained, and you are not, and you, nynaeve, do have
limitations, as yet. but when you dont have an oar, child, any plank will do to
paddle the boat ashore.
but i would be useless, egwene blurted. her voice came out as a squeak,
but she was too afraid to be ashamed. she means it! oh, light, she means it!
liandrin gave me to the seanchan, and now she wants me to hunt thirteen like
her? my studies, my lessons, working in the kitchens. anaiya sedai will
surely want to continue testing me to see if i am a dreamer. ill barely have
time left over to sleep and eat. how can i hunt anything?
you will have to find the time, the amyrlin said, cool and serene once
more, as if hunting the black ajah were no more than sweeping a floor. as
one of the accepted, you choose your own studies, within limits, and the
times for them. and the rules are a little easier for accepted. a little easier.


 they must be found, child.
egwene looked to nynaeve, but what nynaeve said was, why is elayne
not part of this? it cant be because you think she is black ajah. is it because
she is daughterheir of andor?
a full net on the first cast, child. i would make her one of you if i could,
but at the moment morgase gives me enough problems as it is. when i have
her combed and curried and prodded back on the proper path, perhaps elayne
will join you. perhaps then.
then leave egwene out, too, nynaeve said. she is barely old enough to
be a woman. i will do your hunting for you. egwene made a sound of protest
i am a woman!but the amyrlin spoke before her.
i am not setting you out as bait, child. if i had a hundred of you, i would
still not be happy, but there are only you two, so two i will have.
nynaeve, egwene said, i do not understand you. do you mean you want
to do this?
it isnt that i want to, nynaeve said wearily, but id rather hunt them
than sit wondering if the aes sedai teaching me is really a darkfriend. and
whatever they are up to, i do not want to wait until theyre ready to find out
what it is.
the decision egwene came to twisted her stomach. then i will do it, too. i
dont want to sit wondering and waiting any more than you do. nynaeve
opened her mouth, and egwene felt a flash of anger; it was such a relief after
fear. and dont you dare say im too young again. at least i can channel
when i want to. most of the time. i am not a little girl anymore, nynaeve.
nynaeve stood there, jerking on her braid and not saying a word. finally
the stiffness drained out of her. you are not, are you? i have said myself you
are a woman, but i suppose i did not really believe it, inside. girl, ino,
woman. woman, i hope you realize youve climbed into a pickling cauldron
with me, and the fire may be lit.
i know it. egwene was proud that her voice hardly shook at all.
the amyrlin smiled as if pleased, but there was something in her blue eyes
that made egwene suspect she had known what their decisions would be all
along. for an instant, she felt those puppeteers strings on her arms and legs
again.
verin. . . . the amyrlin hesitated, then muttered half to herself. if i must


 trust someone, it might as well be her. she knows as much as i already, and
maybe more. her voice strengthened. verin will give you all that is known
of liandrin and the others, and also a list of the terangreal that were taken,
and what they will do. those that we know. as for any of the black ajah still
in the tower. . . . listen, watch, and be careful of your questions. be like
mice. if you have even a suspicion, report it to me. i will keep an eye on you
myself. no one will think that strange, given what youre being punished for.
you can make your reports when i look in on you. remember, they have
killed before. they could easily kill again.
thats all very well, nynaeve said, but we will still be accepted, and it
is aes sedai were after. any full sister can tell us to go about our business, or
send us off to do her laundry, and we will have no choice but to obey. there
are places accepted are not supposed to go, things were not supposed to do.
light, if we were sure a sister was black ajah, she could tell the guards to
lock us in our rooms and keep us there, and they would do it. they certainly
would not take the word of an accepted over that of an aes sedai.
for the most part, the amyrlin said, you must work within the
limitations of the accepted. the idea is for no one to suspect you. but.
. . .she opened the black box on her table, hesitated and looked at the other
two women as if still unsure she wanted to do this, then took out a number of
stiff, folded papers. sorting through them carefully, she hesitated again, then
chose out two. the remainder she shoved back into the box, and handed those
two to egwene and nynaeve. keep these well hidden. they are for an
emergency only.
egwene unfolded her thick paper. it held writing in a neat, round hand, and
was sealed at the bottom with the white flame of tar valon.
what the bearer does is done at my order and by my authority. obey, and
keep silent, at my command.
siuan sanche
watcher of the seals
flame of tar valon
the amyrlin seat
i could do anything with this, nynaeve said in a wondering voice. order
the guards to march. command the warders. she gave a little laugh. i could
make a warder dance, with this.
until i found out about it, the amyrlin agreed dryly. unless you had a
very convincing reason, id make you wish liandrin had caught you.


 i didnt mean to do any of that, nynaeve said hastily. i just meant that it
gives more authority than i had imagined.
you may need every shred of it. but just you remember, child. a
darkfriend wont heed that any more than a whitecloak would. they would
both likely kill you just for having it. if that paper is a shield . . . well, paper
shields are flimsy, and this one may have a target painted on it.
yes, mother, egwene and nynaeve said together. egwene folded her
paper up and tucked it into her belt pouch, resolving not to take it out again
unless she absolutely had to. and how will i know when that is?
what about mat? nynaeve asked. hes very sick, mother, and he does
not have much time left.
i will send word to you, the amyrlin said curtly.
but, mother
i will send word to you! now, off with you, children. the hope of the
tower rests in your hands. go to your rooms and get some rest. remember,
you have appointments with sheriam, and with the pots.


 c h a p t e r
1 5


the gray man


outside the amyrlin seats study, egwene and nynaeve found the corridors
empty except for an occasional serving woman, hurrying about her duties on
softslippered feet. egwene was grateful for their presence. the halls
suddenly seemed like caverns, for all the tapestries and stonework. dangerous
caverns.
nynaeve strode along purposefully, tugging at her braid fitfully again, and
egwene hurried to keep up. she did not want to be left alone.
if the black ajah is still here, nynaeve, and if they even suspect what
were doing. . . . i hope you didnt mean what you said about acting as if we
are already bound by the three oaths. i dont intend to let them kill me, not if
i can stop it by channeling.
if any of them are still here, egwene, they will know what we are doing as
soon as they see us. despite what she was saying, nynaeve sounded
preoccupied. or at least they will see us as a threat, and thats much the same
thing as far as what they will do.
how will they see us as a threat? nobody is threatened by someone they
can order about. nobody is threatened by someone who has to scrub pots and
turn the spits three times a day. thats why the amyrlin is putting us to work
in the kitchens. part of the reason, anyway.
perhaps the amyrlin did not think it through, nynaeve said absently. or
perhaps she did, and means something different for us than what she claims.
think, egwene. liandrin would not have tried to put us out of the way unless
she thought we were a threat to her. i cant imagine how, or to what, but i
cannot see how it could have changed, either. if there are any black ajah still


 here, they will surely see us the same way, whether they suspect what were
doing or not.
egwene swallowed. i hadnt thought of that. light, i wish i were invisible.
nynaeve, if they are still after us, i will risk being stilled before i let
darkfriends kill me, or maybe worse. and i wont believe you will let them
take you, either, no matter what you told the amyrlin.
i meant it. for a moment nynaeve seemed to rouse from her thoughts.
her steps slowed. a palehaired novice carrying a tray rushed past. i meant
every word, egwene. nynaeve went on when the novice was out of hearing.
there are other ways to defend ourselves. if there were not, aes sedai would
be killed every time they left the tower. we just have to reason those ways
out, and use them.
i know several ways already, and so do you.
they are dangerous. egwene opened her mouth to say they were only
dangerous to whoever attacked her, but nynaeve plowed on over her. you
can come to like them too much. when i let out all my anger at those
whitecloaks this morning. . . . it felt too good. it is too dangerous. she
shivered and quickened her pace again, and egwene had to step lively to
catch up.
you sound like sheriam. you never have before. you have pushed every
limit theyve put on you. why would you accept limits now, when we might
have to ignore them to stay alive?
what good if it ends with us being put out of the tower? stilled or not,
what good then? nynaeves voice dropped as if she were speaking to herself.
i can do it. i must, if im to stay here long enough to learn, and i must learn
if im to suddenly she seemed to realize she was speaking aloud. she shot
a hard look at egwene, and her voice firmed. let me think. please, be quiet
and let me think.
egwene held her tongue, but inside she bubbled with unasked questions.
what special reason did nynaeve have for wanting to learn more of what the
white tower could teach? what was it she wanted to do? why was nynaeve
keeping it secret from her? secrets. weve learned to keep too many secrets
since coming to the tower. the amyrlin is keeping secrets from us, too. light,
what is she going to do about mat?
nynaeve accompanied her all the way back to the novices quarters, not
turning aside to the accepteds quarters. the galleries were still empty, and
they met no one as they climbed the spiraling ramps.


 as they came up on elaynes room, nynaeve stopped, knocked once, and
immediately opened the door and put her head inside. then she was letting
the white door swing shut and striding toward the next, egwenes room. she
isnt here yet, she said. i need to talk to both of you.
egwene caught her shoulders and pulled her to an abrupt halt. what?
something tugged at her hair, stung her ear. a black blur streaked in front of
her face to clang against the wall, and in the next breath nynaeve was bearing
her to the gallery floor, behind the railing.
wideeyed and sprawling, egwene stared at what lay on the stone in front
of her door, where it had fallen. a bolt from a crossbow. a few dark strands
from her hair were tangled in the four heavy prongs, meant for punching
through armor. she raised a trembling hand to touch her ear, to touch the
tiniest nick, damp with a bead of blood. if i had not stopped just then. . . . if i
hadnt. . . . the quarrel would have gone right through her head, and would
probably have killed nynaeve, too. blood and ashes! she gasped. blood
and bloody ashes!
watch your language, nynaeve admonished, but her heart was not in it.
she lay peering between the white stone balusters toward the far side of the
galleries. a glow surrounded her, to egwenes eyes. she had embraced saidar.
hastily, egwene tried to reach out for the one power, too, but at first haste
defeated her. haste, and images that kept intruding on the emptiness, images
of her head being ripped apart like a rotten melon by a heavy quarrel that
went on to bury itself in nynaeve. she took a deep breath and tried again, and
finally the rose floated in nothingness, opened to the true source, and the
power filled her.
she rolled onto her stomach to peer through the railing beside nynaeve.
do you see anything? do you see him? ill put a lightning bolt through
him! she could feel it building, pressing on her to loose it. it is a man, isnt
it? she could not imagine a man coming into the novices quarters, but it was
impossible to picture a woman carrying a crossbow through the tower.
i dont know. quiet anger filled nynaeves voice; her anger was always
at its worst when she grew quiet with it. i thought i sawyes! there!
egwene felt the power pulse in the other woman, and then nynaeve was
unhurriedly getting to her feet, brushing at her dress as if there were nothing
more to worry about.
egwene stared at her. what? what did you do? nynaeve?
 of the five powers,  nynaeve said in a lecturing tone, faintly mocking,


  air, sometimes called wind, is thought by many to be of the least use. this
is far from true.  she finished with a tight laugh. i told you there were other
ways to defend ourselves. i used air, to hold him with air. if it is a he; i could
not see him clearly. a trick the amyrlin showed me once, though i doubt she
expected me to see how it was done. well, are you going to lie there all day?
egwene scrambled up to hurry after her around the gallery. before long a
man did come into sight around the curve, dressed in plain brown breeches
and coat. he stood facing the other way, balanced on the ball of one foot, with
the other hanging in midair as if he had been caught in the middle of running.
the man would feel as if he were buried in thick jelly, yet it was nothing but
air stiffened around him. egwene remembered the amyrlins trick, too, but
she did not think she could duplicate it. nynaeve only had to see a thing done
once to know how to do it herself. when she could manage to channel at all,
of course.
they came closer, and egwenes melding with the power vanished in
shock. the hilt of a dagger stood out from the mans chest. his face sagged,
and death had already filmed his halfclosed eyes. he crumpled to the gallery
floor as nynaeve loosed the trap that had held him.
he was an averageappearing man, of average height and average build,
with features so ordinary egwene did not think she would have noticed him in
a group of three. she only studied him a moment, though, before realizing
that something was missing. a crossbow.
she gave a start and looked about wildly. there had to be another one,
nynaeve. somebody took the crossbow. and somebody stabbed him. he
could be out there ready to shoot at us again.
calm yourself, nynaeve said, but she peered both ways along the gallery,
jerking at her braid. just be calm, and we will figure out what to her
words cut off at the sound of steps on the ramp leading up to their level.
egwenes heart pounded, seemingly in her throat. eyes fastened on the
head of the ramp, she desperately strove to touch saidar again, but for her that
required calm, and her heartbeats shattered calm.
sheriam sedai stopped at the top of the ramp, frowning at what she saw.
what in the name of the light has happened here? she hurried forward, her
serenity gone for once.
we found him, nynaeve said as the mistress of novices knelt beside the
corpse.


 sheriam put a hand to the mans chest, and jerked it back twice as fast,
hissing. steeling herself visibly, she touched him again, and maintained the
touch longer. dead, she muttered. as dead as it is possible to be, and
more. when she straightened, she pulled a handkerchief from her sleeve and
wiped her fingers. you found him? here? like this?
egwene nodded, sure that if she spoke, sheriam would hear the lie in her
voice.
we did, nynaeve said firmly.
sheriam shook her head. a mana dead man, at that!in the novices
quarters would be scandal enough, but this . . . !
what makes him different? nynaeve asked. and how could he be more
than dead?
sheriam took a deep breath, and gave them each a searching look. he is
one of the soulless. a gray man. absently, she wiped her fingers again, her
eyes going back to the body. worried eyes.
the soulless? egwene said, a tremor in her voice, at the same time that
nynaeve said, a gray man?
sheriam glanced at them, a look as penetrating as it was brief. not a part
of your studies, yet, but you seem to have gone beyond the rules in a great
many ways. and considering you found this. . . . she gestured to the corpse.
the soulless, the gray men, give up their souls to serve the dark one as
assassins. they are not really alive, after that. not quite dead, but not truly
alive. and despite the name, some gray men are women. a very few. even
among darkfriends, only a handful of women are stupid enough to make that
sacrifice. you can look right at them and hardly notice them, until it is too
late. he was as much as dead while he walked. now, only my eyes tell me
that what is lying there ever lived at all. she gave them another long look.
no gray man has dared enter tar valon since the trolloc wars.
what will you do? egwene asked. sheriams brows rose, and she quickly
added, if i may ask, sheriam sedai.
the aes sedai hesitated. i suppose you may, since you had the bad luck to
find him. it will be up to the amyrlin seat, but with everything that has
happened, i believe she will want to keep this as quiet as is possible. we do
not need more rumors. you will speak of this to none but me, or to the
amyrlin, should she mention it first.
yes, aes sedai, egwene said fervently. nynaeves voice was cooler.


 sheriam appeared to take their obedience for granted. she gave no sign of
having heard them. her attention was all on the dead man. the gray man.
the soulless. there will be no hiding the fact that a man was killed here.
the glow of the one power suddenly surrounded her, and just as abruptly, a
long, low dome covered the body on the floor, grayish and so opaque that it
was hard to see there was a body under it. but this will keep anyone else
from touching him who can discover his nature. i must have this removed
before the novices come back.
her tilted green eyes regarded them as if she had just remembered their
presence. you two go, now. to your room, i think, nynaeve. considering
what you are already facing, if it became known you were involved in this,
even on the edge of it. . . . go.
egwene curtsied, and tugged at nynaeves sleeve, but nynaeve said, why
did you come up here, sheriam sedai?
for a moment sheriam looked startled, but on the instant she frowned. fists
on her hips, she regarded nynaeve with all the firmness of her office. does
the mistress of novices now need an excuse for coming to the novices
quarters, accepted? she said softly. do accepted now question aes sedai?
the amyrlin means to make something of you two, but whether she does or
not, i will teach you manners, at least. now, the pair of you, go, before i haul
you both down to my study, and not for the appointment the amyrlin seat has
already set for you.
a sudden thought came to egwene. forgive me, sheriam sedai, she said
quickly, but i must fetch my cloak. i feel cold. she rushed away, around the
gallery before the aes sedai could speak.
if sheriam found that crossbow bolt in front of her door, there would be too
many questions. no pretending they had only found the man, that he had no
connection to her, then. but when she reached the door to her room, the heavy
bolt was gone. only the jagged chip in the stone beside the door said it had
ever been there.
egwenes skin crawled. how could anyone take it without one of us seeing.
. . . another gray man! she had embraced saidar before she knew it, only the
sweet flow of the power inside her telling her what she had done. even so, it
was one of the hardest things she had ever done, opening that door and going
into her room. there was no one there. she snatched the white cloak off its
peg and ran out, anyway, and she did not release saidar until she was halfway
back to the others.


 something more had passed between the women while she was gone.
nynaeve was attempting to appear meek, and succeeding only in looking as if
she had a sour stomach. sheriam had her fists on her hips and was tapping her
foot irritably, and the stare she was giving nynaeve, like green millstones
ready to start grinding barley flour, took in egwene equally.
forgive me, sheriam sedai, she said hastily, dropping a curtsy and
settling her cloak on her shoulders at the same time. this . . . finding a dead
mana . . . a gray man!it made me cold. if we may go now?
at sheriams tight nod of dismissal, nynaeve made a bare curtsy. egwene
seized her arm and hustled her away.
are you trying to make more trouble for us? she demanded when they
were two levels down. and safely out of earshot of sheriam, she hoped.
what else did you say to her, to make her glare like that? more questions, i
suppose? i hope you learned something worth making her mad at us.
she would not say anything, nynaeve muttered. we must ask questions
if we are to do any good, egwene. we will have to take a few chances, or
well never learn anything.
egwene sighed. well, be a little more circumspect. from the set of
nynaeves face, the other woman had no intention of going easy or avoiding
risks. egwene sighed again. the crossbow bolt was gone, nynaeve. it must
have been another gray man who took it.
so that is why you. . . . light! nynaeve frowned and gave a sharp tug to
her braid.
after a time egwene said, what was that she did to cover the . . . the
body? she did not want to think of it as a gray man; that reminded her there
was another one out there. she did not want to think of anything at all, right
then.
air, nynaeve replied. she used air. a neat trick, and i think i see how
to make something useful with it.
the use of the one power was divided into the five powers: earth, air,
fire, water, and spirit. different talents required different combinations of
the five powers. i dont understand some of the ways the five powers are
combined. take healing. i can see why it requires spirit, and maybe air, but
why water?
nynaeve rounded on her. what are you babbling about? have you
forgotten what were doing? she looked around. they had reached the


 accepteds quarters, a stack of galleries lower than the novices quarters,
surrounding a garden rather than a court. there was no one in sight except for
another accepted, hurrying along on another level, but she lowered her voice.
have you forgotten the black ajah?
i am trying to forget it, egwene said fiercely. for a little while, anyway.
i am trying to forget that we just left a dead man. im trying to forget that he
almost killed me, and that he has a companion who might try it again. she
touched her ear; the drop of blood had dried, but the nick still hurt. we are
lucky we arent both dead right now.
nynaeves face softened, but when she spoke her voice held something of
the time when she had been the wisdom of emonds field, saying words that
had to be said for someones own good. remember that body, egwene.
remember that he tried to kill you. kill us. remember the black ajah.
remember them all the time. because if you forget, just once, the next time, it
may be you lying dead.
i know, egwene sighed. but i do not have to like it.
did you notice what sheriam did not mention?
no. what?
she never wondered who stabbed him. now, come on. my room is just
down here, and you can put your feet up while we talk.


 c h a p t e r
1 6


hunters three


nynaeves room was considerably larger than the novice rooms. she had a
real bed, not one built into the wall, two ladderback armchairs instead of a
stool, and a wardrobe for her clothes. the furnishings were all plain, suitable
for a middling successful farmers house, but compared to the novices, the
accepted lived in luxury. there was even a small rug, woven with scrolls of
yellow and red on blue. the room was not empty when egwene and nynaeve
entered.
elayne stood in front of the fireplace, arms crossed beneath her breasts and
eyes red at least partly from anger. two tall young men sprawled in the chairs,
all arms and legs. one, with his dark green coat undone to show a snowy
shirt, shared elaynes blue eyes and redgold hair, and his grinning face
marked him plainly as her brother. the other, nynaeves age and with his
gray coat neatly buttoned, was slender and dark of hair and eye. he rose, all
sure confidence and lithely muscled grace, when egwene and nynaeve came
in. he was, egwene thought not for the first time, the most handsome man she
had ever seen. his name was galad.
it is good to see you again, he said, taking her hand. i have worried
much over you. we have worried much.
her pulse quickened, and she took back her hand before he should feel it.
thank you, galad, she murmured. light, but hes beautiful. she told herself
to stop thinking that way. it was not easy. she found herself smoothing her
dress, wishing he were seeing her in silk instead of this plain white wool,
perhaps even one of those domani dresses min had told her of, the ones that
clung and seemed so thin you thought they must be transparent even though
they were not. she flushed furiously and banished the image from her mind,


 willed him to look away from her face. it did not help that half the women in
the tower, from scullery maids to aes sedai themselves, looked at him as if
they had the same thoughts. it did not help that his smile seemed for her
alone. in fact, his smile made it worse. light, if he even suspected what i was
thinking, id die!
the goldenhaired young man leaned forward in his chair. the question is,
where have you been? elayne dodges my questions as if she has a pocket full
of figs and doesnt want me to have any.
i have told you, gawyn, elayne said in a tight voice, it is none of your
affair. i came here, she added to nynaeve, because i did not want to be
alone. they saw me, and followed. they would not take no for an answer.
wouldnt they, nynaeve said flatly.
but it is our affair, sister, galad said. your safety is very much our
affair. he looked at egwene, and she felt her heart jump. the safety of all of
you is very important to me. to us.
i am not your sister, elayne snapped.
if you want company, gawyn told elayne with a smile, we can do as
well as any. and after what we went through just to be here, we deserve some
explanation of where youve been. i would rather let galad thump me all over
the practice yard all day than face mother again for a single minute. id rather
have coulin mad at me. coulin was master of arms, and kept a tight
discipline among the young men who came to train at the white tower
whether they aspired to become warders or just to learn from them.
deny the connection if you will, galad told elayne gravely, but it is still
there. and mother put your safety in our hands.
gawyn grimaced. shell have our hides, elayne, if anything happens to
you. we had to talk fast, or shed have hauled us back home with her. i have
never heard of a queen sending her own sons to the headsman, but mother
sounded ready to make an exception if we dont bring you home safely.
i am sure, elayne said, that your fast talk was all for me. none of it was
meant to let you stay here studying with the warders. gawyns face
reddened.
your safety was our first concern. galad sounded as if he meant it, and
egwene was sure he did. we managed to convince mother that if you did
return here, you would need someone to look after you.


 look after me! elayne exclaimed, but galad went on smoothly.
the white tower has become a dangerous place. there have been deaths
murderswith no real explanations. even some aes sedai have been
killed, though they have tried to keep that quiet. and i have heard rumors of
the black ajah, spoken in the tower itself. by mothers command, when it is
safe for you to leave your training, we are to return you to caemlyn.
for answer, elayne lifted her chin and half turned away from him.
gawyn ran a hand through his hair in frustration. light, nynaeve, galad
and i are not villains. all we want to do is help. we would do it anyway, but
mother commanded it, so theres no chance of you talking us out of it.
morgases commands carry no weight in tar valon, nynaeve said in a
level voice. as for your offer of help, i will remember it. should we need
help, you will be among the first to hear of it. for now, i wish you to leave.
she gestured pointedly to the door, but he ignored her.
that is all very well, but mother will want to know elayne has come back.
and why she ran off without a word, and what she was doing these months.
light, elayne! the whole tower was in a turmoil. mother was halfcrazed
with fear. i thought shed tear the tower down with her bare hands. elaynes
face took on a measure of guilt, and gawyn pressed his advantage. you owe
her that much, elayne. you owe me that much. burn me, youre being as
stubborn as stone. youve been gone for months, and all i know about it is
that youve run afoul of sheriam. and the only reasons i know that much are
because youve been crying and you wont sit down. elaynes indignant
stare said he had squandered whatever momentary advantage he might have
had.
enough, nynaeve said. galad and gawyn opened their mouths. she
raised her voice. i said enough! she glared at them until it was clear their
silence would hold, then went on. elayne owes the two of you nothing. since
she chooses to tell you nothing, that is that. now, this is my room, not the
common room of an inn, and i want you out of it.
but, elayne gawyn began at the same time that galad said, we only
want
nynaeve spoke loudly enough to drown them out. i doubt you asked
permission to enter the accepteds quarters. they stared at her, looking
surprised. i thought not. you will be out of my room, out of my sight, before
i count three, or i will write a note to the master of arms about this. coulin
gaidin has a much stronger arm than sheriam sedai, and you may be assured


 that i will be there to see he makes a proper job of it.
nynaeve, you wouldnt gawyn began worriedly, but galad motioned
him to silence and stepped closer to nynaeve.
her face kept its stern expression, but she unconsciously smoothed the
front of her dress as he smiled down at her. egwene was not surprised. she
did not think she had met a woman outside the red ajah who would not be
affected by galads smile.
i apologize, nynaeve, for our forcing ourselves on you unwanted, he said
smoothly. we will go, of course. but remember that we are here if you need
us. and whatever caused you to run away, we can help with that, as well.
nynaeve returned his smile. one, she said.
galad blinked, his smile fading. calmly, he turned to egwene. gawyn got
up and started for the door. egwene, galad said, you know that you,
especially, can call on me at any time, for anything. i hope you know that.
two, nynaeve said.
galad gave her an irritated look. we will talk again, he told egwene,
bowing over her hand. with a last smile, he took an unhurried step toward the
door.
thrrrrrrrrrgawyn darted through the door, and even galads graceful
stride quickened markedlyree, nynaeve finished as the door banged shut
behind them.
elayne clapped her hands delightedly. oh, well done, she said. very
well done. i did not even know men were forbidden the accepteds quarters,
too.
they arent, nynaeve said dryly, but those louts did not know it, either.
elayne clapped her hands again and laughed. id have let them just leave,
nynaeve added, if galad had not made such a show of taking his time about
it. that young man has too fair a face for his own good. egwene almost
laughed at that; galad was no more than a year younger that nynaeve, if that,
and nynaeve was straightening her dress again.
galad! elayne sniffed. hell bother us again, and i do not know whether
your trick will work more than once. he does what he sees as right no matter
who it hurts, even himself.
then i will think of something else, nynaeve said. we cant afford to
have them looking over our shoulders all the time. elayne, if you wish, i can


 make a salve that will soothe you.
elayne shook her head, then lay down across the bed with her chin in her
hands. if sheriam found out, we would no doubt both have yet another visit
to her study to look forward to. you have not said very much, egwene. cat
caught your tongue? her expression became grimmer. or perhaps galad
has?
egwene blushed in spite of herself. i simply did not choose to argue with
them, she said in as dignified a tone as she could manage.
of course, elayne said grudgingly. i will admit that galad is goodlooking. but he is horrid, too. he always does right, as he sees it i know that
does not sound horrid, but it is. he has never disobeyed mother, not in the
smallest thing that i know of. he will not tell a lie, even a small one, or break
a rule. if he turns you in for breaking one, there isnt the slightest spite in it
he seems sad you could not live up to his standards, if anythingbut that
doesnt change the fact that he will turn you in.
that soundsuncomfortable, egwene said carefully, but not horrid. i
cannot imagine galad doing anything horrid.
elayne shook her head, as if in disbelief that egwene found it so hard to see
what was clear to her. if you want to pay attention to someone, try gawyn.
he is nice enoughmost of the timeand hes besotted with you.
gawyn! he has never looked at me twice.
of course not, you fool, the way you stare at galad until your eyes look
ready to fall out of your face. egwenes cheeks felt hot, but she was afraid it
might well be true. galad saved his life when gawyn was a child, elayne
went on. gawyn will never admit he is interested in a woman if galad is
interested in her, but i have heard him talk about you, and i know. he never
could hide things from me.
that is nice to know, egwene said, then laughed at elaynes grin.
perhaps i can get him to say some of those things to me instead of you.
you could choose green ajah, you know. green sisters sometimes marry.
gawyn truly is besotted, and you would be good for him. besides, i would
like to have you for a sister.
if you two are finished with girlish chatter, nynaeve cut in, there are
important matters to talk about.
yes, elayne said, such as what the amyrlin seat had to say to you after


 i left.
i would rather not talk about that, egwene said awkwardly. she did not
like lying to elayne. she did not say anything that was pleasant.
elayne gave a sniff of disbelief. most people think i get off easier than the
others because i am daughterheir of andor. the truth is that if anything, i
catch it harder than the rest because im daughterheir. neither of you did
anything i did not, and if the amyrlin had harsh words for you, she would
have twice as harsh for me. now, what did she say?
you must keep this just between us three, nynaeve said. the black
ajah
nynaeve! egwene exclaimed. the amyrlin said elayne was to be left
out of it!
the black ajah! elayne almost shouted, scrambling up to kneel in the
middle of the bed. you cannot leave me out after telling me this much. i
wont be left out.
i never meant for you to be, nynaeve assured her. egwene could only
stare at her in amazement. egwene, it was you and i who liandrin saw as a
threat. it was you and i who were just nearly killed
nearly killed? elayne whispered.
perhaps because we are still a threat, and perhaps because they already
know that we were closeted alone with the amyrlin, and even what she told
us. we need someone with us who they do not know about, and if she isnt
known to the amyrlin, either, so much the better. i am not sure we can trust
the amyrlin much further than the black ajah. she means to use us for her
own ends. i mean to see she doesnt use us up. can you understand that?
egwene nodded reluctantly. just the same, she said, it will be dangerous,
elayne, as dangerous as anything we faced in falme. maybe more so. you do
not have to be part of it, this time.
i know that, elayne said quietly. she paused, then went on. when
andor goes to war, the first prince of the sword commands the army, but the
queen rides with them, too. seven hundred years ago, at the battle of cuallin
dhen, the andormen were being routed when queen modrellein rode, alone
and unarmed, carrying the lion banner into the midst of the tairen army. the
andormen rallied and attacked once more, to save her, and won the battle.
that is the kind of courage expected of the queen of andor. if i have not
learned to control my fear yet, i must before i take my mothers place on the


 lion throne. suddenly her somber mood vanished in a giggle. besides, do
you think i would pass up an adventure so i could scrub pots?
you will do that anyway, nynaeve told her, and hope that everyone
thinks that is all you are doing. now listen carefully.
elayne listened, and her mouth slowly dropped open as nynaeve unfolded
what the amyrlin seat had told them, and the task she had laid on them, and
the attempt on their lives. she shivered over the gray man, and read the
document the amyrlin had given nynaeve with a look of wonder, then
returned it, murmuring, i wish i could have that when i face mother next.
by the time nynaeve finished, though, her face was a picture of indignation.
why, thats like being told to go up in the hills and find lions, only you do
not know whether there are any lions, but if there are, they may be hunting
you, and they may be disguised as bushes. oh, and if you find any lions, try
not to let them eat you before you can tell where they are.
if you are afraid, nynaeve said, you can still stand aside. it will be too
late, once youve begun.
elayne tossed her head back. of course i am afraid. i am not a fool. but
not afraid enough to quit before i have even started.
there is something else, too, nynaeve said. i am afraid the amyrlin
may mean to let mat die.
but an aes sedai is supposed to heal anyone who asks. the daughterheir seemed caught between indignation and disbelief. why would she let
mat die? i cannot believe it! i will not!
nor can i! egwene gasped. she could not have meant that! the amyrlin
couldnt let him die! all the way here verin said that the amyrlin would see
he was healed.
nynaeve shook her head. verin said the amyrlin would see to him. that
is not the same thing. and the amyrlin avoided saying yes or no when i asked
her. maybe she has not made her mind up.
but why? elayne asked.
because the white tower does what it does for its own reasons.
nynaeves voice made egwene shiver. i do not know why. whether they
help mat live or let him die depends on what serves their ends. none of the
three oaths says they have to heal him. mat is just a tool, in the amyrlins
eyes. so are we. she will use us to hunt the black ajah, but if you break a


 tool so it cannot be fixed, you dont weep over it. you just get another one.
both of you had best remember that.
what are we going to do about him? egwene asked. what can we do?
nynaeve went to her wardrobe and rummaged in the back of it. when she
came out, she had a striped cloth bag of herbs. with my medicinesand
luckperhaps i can heal him myself.
verin could not, elayne said. moiraine and verin together could not,
and moiraine had an angreal. nynaeve, if you draw too much of the one
power, you could burn yourself to a cinder. or just still yourself, if you are
lucky. if you can call that luck.
nynaeve shrugged. they keep telling me i have the potential to be the
most powerful aes sedai in a thousand years. perhaps it is time to find out
whether they are right. she gave a tug to her braid.
it was plain that however brave nynaeves words, she was afraid. but she
wont let mat die even if it means risking death herself. they keep saying
were all three so powerfulor will be. maybe, if we all try together, we can
divide the flow among us.
we have never tried working together, nynaeve said slowly. i am not
sure i know how to combine our abilities. trying could be almost as
dangerous as drawing too much of the power.
oh, if we are going to do it, elayne said, climbing off the bed, lets do
it. the longer we talk of it, the more frightened i will become. mat is in the
guest rooms. i do not know which one, but sheriam told me that much.
as if to put period to her words, the door banged open, and an aes sedai
entered as though it were her room, and they the interlopers.
egwene made her curtsy deep, to hide the dismay on her face.


 c h a p t e r
1 7


the red sister


elaida was a handsome woman rather than beautiful, and the sternness on
her face added maturity to her ageless aes sedai features. she did not look
old, yet egwene could never imagine elaida as having been young. except for
the most formal occasions, few aes sedai wore the vineembroidered shawl
with the white teardrop flame of tar valon large on the wearers back, but
elaida wore hers, the long red fringe announcing her ajah. red slashed her
dress of creamcolored silk, too, and red slippers peeked under the edge of her
skirts as she moved into the room. her dark eyes watched them as a birds
eyes watched worms.
so all of you are together. somehow, that does not surprise me. her voice
made no more pretense than her bearing did; she was a woman of power, and
ready to wield it if she decided it was necessary, a woman who knew more
than those she spoke to. it was much the same for a queen as for a novice.
forgive me, elaida sedai, nynaeve said, dropping another curtsy, but i
was about to go out. i have much to catch up in my studies. if you will forgive


your studies can wait, elaida said. they have waited long enough
already, after all. she plucked the cloth bag out of nynaeves hands and
undid the strings, but after one glance inside she tossed it on the floor. herbs.
you are not a village wisdom any longer, child. trying to hold on to the past
will only hold you back.
elaida sedai, elayne said, i
be silent, novice. elaidas voice was cold and soft, as silk wrapped
around steel is soft. you may have broken a bond between tar valon and


 caemlyn that has lasted a thousand years. you will speak when spoken to.
elaynes eyes examined the floor in front of her toes. spots of color burned in
her cheeks. guilt, or anger? egwene was not sure.
ignoring them all, elaida sat down in one of the chairs, carefully arranging
her skirts. she made no gesture for the rest of them to sit. nynaeves face
tightened, and she began giving sharp little tugs to her braid. egwene hoped
she would keep her temper well enough not to take the other chair without
permission.
when elaida had settled herself to her own satisfaction, she studied them
for a time in silence, her face unreadable. at last she said, did you know that
we have the black ajah among us?
egwene exchanged startled glances with nynaeve and elayne.
we were told, nynaeve said cautiously. elaida sedai, she added after a
pause.
elaida arched an eyebrow. yes. i thought that you might know of it.
egwene gave a start at her tone, implying so much more than it said, and
nynaeve opened her mouth angrily, but the aes sedais flat stare stilled
tongues. the two of you, elaida went on in a casual tone, vanish, taking
with you the daughterheir of andorthe girl who may become queen of
andor one day, if i do not strip off her hide and sell it to a glove maker
vanish without permission, without a word, without a trace.
i was not carried off, elayne said to the floor. i went of my own will.
will you obey me, child? a glow surrounded elaida. the aes sedais
glare was fixed on elayne. must i teach you, here and now?
elayne raised her head, and there was no mistaking what was in her face.
anger. for a long moment she met elaidas stare.
egwenes fingernails dug into her palms. it was maddening. she, or elayne,
or nynaeve, could destroy elaida where she sat. if they caught elaida by
surprise, at least; she was fully trained, after all. and if we do anything but
take whatever she wants to feed us, we throw away everything. dont throw it
away now, elayne.
elaynes head dropped. forgive me, elaida sedai, she mumbled. i
forgot myself.
the glow winked out of existence, and elaida sniffed audibly. you have
learned bad habits, wherever these two took you. you cannot afford bad


 habits, child. you will be the first queen of andor ever to be aes sedai. the
first queen anywhere to be aes sedai in over a thousand years. you will be
one of the strongest of us since the breaking of the world, perhaps strong
enough to be the first ruler since the breaking to openly tell the world she is
aes sedai. do not risk all of that, child, because you can still lose it all. i have
invested too much time to see that. do you understand me?
i think so, elaida sedai, elayne said. she sounded as if she did not
understand at all. no more did egwene.
elaida abandoned the subject. you may be in grave danger. all three of
you. you disappear and return, and in the interval, liandrin and her . . .
companions leave us. there will inevitably be comparisons. we are sure
liandrin and those who went with her are darkfriends. black ajah. i would
not see the same charge leveled at elayne, and to protect her, it seems i must
protect all of you. tell me why you ran away, and what you have been doing
these months, and i will do what i can for you. her eyes fastened on egwene
like grappling hooks.
egwene floundered for an answer that the aes sedai would accept. it was
said that elaida could hear a lie, sometimes. it . . . it was mat. he is very
sick. she tried to choose her words carefully, to say nothing that was not
true, yet give an impression far from truth. aes sedai do it all the time. we
went to. . . . we brought him back to be healed. if we hadnt, he would die.
the amyrlin is going to heal him. i hope. she made herself continue to
meet the red aes sedais gaze, willed herself not to shift her feet guiltily.
from elaidas face, there was no way to tell whether she believed a word.
that is enough, egwene, nynaeve said. elaidas penetrating look shifted
to her, but she gave no sign of being affected by it. she met the aes sedais
eyes without blinking. forgive me for interrupting, elaida sedai, she said
smoothly, but the amyrlin seat said our transgressions were to be put behind
us and forgotten. as part of making a new beginning, we are not even to
speak of them. the amyrlin said it should be as if they never happened.
she said that, did she? still nothing in elaidas voice or on her face told
whether she believed or not. interesting. you can hardly forget entirely when
your punishment has been announced to the entire tower. unprecedented,
that. unheard of, for less than stilling. i can see why you are eager to put it all
behind you. i understand you are to be raised to the accepted, elayne. and
egwene. that is hardly punishment.
elayne glanced at the aes sedai as though for permission to speak. the


 mother said we were ready, she said. a touch of defiance entered her voice.
i have learned, elaida sedai, and grown. she would not have named me to
be raised if i had not.
learned, elaida said musingly. and grown. perhaps you have. there
was no hint in her tone whether she thought this was good. her gaze shifted
back to egwene and nynaeve, searching. you returned with this mat, a
youth from your village. there was another young man from your village.
rand althor.
egwene felt as if an icy hand had suddenly gripped her stomach.
i hope he is well, nynaeve said levelly, but her hand was a fist gripping
her braid. we have not seen him in some time.
an interesting young man. elaida studied them as she spoke. i met him
only once, but i found himmost interesting. i believe he must be taveren.
yes. the answers to many questions may rest in him. this emonds field of
yours must be an unusual place to produce the two of you. and rand
althor.
it is just a village, nynaeve said. just a village like any other.
yes. of course. elaida smiled, a cold quirk of her lips that twisted
egwenes stomach. tell me about him. the amyrlin has not commanded
you to be silent about him also, has she?
nynaeve gave her braid a tug. elayne studied the carpet as if something
important were hidden in it, and egwene racked her brain for an answer. she
can hear lies, they say. light, if she can really hear a lie. . . . the moment
stretched on, until finally nynaeve opened her mouth.
at that instant the door opened again. sheriam regarded the room with a
measure of surprise. it is well i find you here, elayne. i want all three of you.
i had not expected you, elaida.
elaida stood, arranging her shawl. we are all curious about these girls.
why they ran away. what adventures they had while gone. they say the
mother has commanded them not to speak of it.
as well not to, sheriam said. they are to be punished, and that should
be an end to it. i have always felt that when punishment is done, the fault that
caused it should be erased.
for a long moment the two aes sedai stood looking at each other, no
expression on either smooth face. then elaida said, of course. perhaps i will


 speak to them another time. about other matters. the look she gave to the
three women in white seemed to egwene to carry a warning, and then she was
slipping past sheriam.
holding the door open, the mistress of novices watched the other aes
sedai go down the gallery. her face was still unreadable.
egwene let out a long breath, and heard echoes from nynaeve and elayne.
she threatened me, elayne said incredulously, and half to herself. she
threatened me with stilling, if i dont stop beingwillful!
you mistook her, sheriam said. if being willful were a stilling offense,
the list of the stilled would have more names on it than you could learn. few
meek women ever achieve the ring and the shawl. that is not to say, of
course, that you must not learn to act meekly when it is required.
yes, sheriam sedai, they all three said almost as one, and sheriam
smiled.
you see? you can give the appearance of meekness, at least. and you will
have plenty of opportunity to practice before you earn your way back into the
amyrlins good graces. and mine. mine will be harder to achieve.
yes, sheriam sedai, egwene said, but this time only elayne spoke with
her.
nynaeve said, what of . . . the body, sheriam sedai? the . . . the soulless?
have you discovered who killed him? or why he entered the tower?
sheriams mouth tightened. you take one step forward, nynaeve, and then
a step back. since from elaynes lack of surprise, you have obviously told her
of itafter i told you not to speak of the matter!then there are exactly
seven people in the tower who know a man was killed today in the novices
quarters, and two of them are men who know no more than that. except that
they are to keep their mouths shut. if an order from the mistress of novices
carries no weight with youand if that is so, i will correct youperhaps you
will obey one from the amyrlin seat. you are to speak of this to no one
except the mother or me. the amyrlin will not have more rumors piled on
those we must already contend with. do i make myself clear?
the firmness of her voice produced a chorus of yes, sheriam sedaibut
nynaeve refused to stop at that. seven, you said, sheriam sedai. plus
whoever killed him. and maybe they had help getting into the tower.
that is no concern of yours. sheriams level gaze included them all. i


 will ask whatever questions must be asked about this man. you will forget
you know anything at all about a dead man. if i discover you are doing
anything else. . . . well, there are worse things than scrubbing pots to occupy
your attention. and i will not accept any excuses. do i hear any more
questions?
no, sheriam sedai. this time, nynaeve joined in, to egwenes relief. not
that she felt very much relief. sheriams watchful eye would make it doubly
hard to carry out a search for the black ajah. for a moment she felt like
laughing hysterically. if the black ajah doesnt catch us, sheriam will. the
urge to laugh vanished. if sheriam isnt black ajah herself. she wished she
could make that thought go away.
sheriam nodded. very well, then. you will come with me.
to where? nynaeve asked, and added, sheriam sedai, only an instant
before the aes sedais eyes narrowed.
have you forgotten, sheriam said in a tight voice, that in the tower,
healing is always done in the presence of those who bring their sick to us?
egwene thought that the mistress of novicess stock of patience with them
was about used up, but before she could stop herself, she burst out, then she
is going to heal him!
the amyrlin seat herself, among others, will see to him. sheriams face
held no more expression than her voice. did you have reason to doubt it?
egwene could only shake her head. then you waste your friends life
standing here. the amyrlin seat is not to be kept waiting. yet despite her
words, egwene had the feeling the aes sedai was in no hurry at all.


 c h a p t e r
1 8


healing


lamps on iron wall brackets lit the passages deep beneath the tower, where
sheriam took them. the few doors they passed were shut tight, some locked,
some so cunningly worked that they remained unseen until egwene was right
on top of them. dark openings marked most of the crossing hallways, while
down others she could only see the dim glow of distant lights spaced far apart.
she saw no other people. these were not places even aes sedai often came.
the air was neither cool nor warm, but she shivered anyway, and at the same
time felt sweat trickling down her back.
it was down here, in the depths of the white tower, that novices went
through their last test before being raised to accepted. or put out of the
tower, if they failed. down here, accepted took the three oaths after passing
their final test. no one, she realized, had ever told her what happened to an
accepted who failed. down here, somewhere, was the room where the
towers few angreal and saangreal were kept, and the places where the
terangreal were stored. the black ajah had struck at those storerooms. and
if some of the black ajah were lying in wait in one of those dark side
corridors, if sheriam were leading them not to mat, but to. . . .
she gave a squeak when the aes sedai stopped suddenly, then colored
when the others looked at her curiously. i was thinking about the black
ajah, she said weakly.
do not think of it, sheriam said, and for once she sounded like the
sheriam of old, kindly if firm. the black ajah will not be your worry for
years to come. you have what the rest of us do not: time before you must deal
with it. much time, yet. when we enter, stay against the wall and keep silent.
you are allowed here as a benevolence, to attend, not to distract or interfere.


 she opened a door covered in gray metal worked to look like stone.
the square room within was spacious, its pale stone walls bare. the only
furnishing was a long stone table draped with a white cloth, in the middle of
the room. mat lay on that table, fully clothed save for coat and boots, eyes
closed and face so gaunt that egwene wanted to cry. his labored breathing
made a hoarse whistle. the shadar logoth dagger hung sheathed at his belt,
the ruby capping its hilt seeming to gather light, so it glowed like some fierce
red eye despite the illumination of a dozen lamps, magnified by the pale walls
and whitetiled floor.
the amyrlin seat stood at mats head, and leane at his feet. four aes
sedai stood down one side of the table, and three down the other. sheriam
joined the three. one of them was verin. egwene recognized serafelle,
another brown sister, and alanna mosvani, of the green ajah, and anaiya, of
the blue, which was moiraines ajah.
alanna and anaiya had each taught her some of her lessons in opening
herself to the true source, in how to surrender to saidar in order to control it.
and between her first arrival in the white tower and her departure, anaiya
must have tested her fifty times to see if she was a dreamer. the tests had
shown nothing one way or the other, but plainfaced, kindly anaiya, with that
warm smile that was her only beauty, had kept calling her back for more tests,
as implacable as a boulder rolling downhill.
the rest were unknown to her, except for one cooleyed woman she
thought was a white. the amyrlin and the keeper wore their stoles, of
course, but none of the others had anything to mark them out except great
serpent rings and ageless aes sedai faces. none of them acknowledged the
presence of egwene and the other two by so much as a glance.
despite the outward calm of the women around the table, egwene thought
she saw signs of uncertainty. a tightness to anaiyas mouth. a slight frown on
alannas darkly beautiful face. the cooleyed woman kept smoothing her
pale blue dress over her thighs without seeming to realize what she was
doing.
an aes sedai egwene did not know set a plain, polished wooden box, long
and narrow, on the table and opened it. from its nest in the red silk lining, the
amyrlin took out a white, fluted wand the length of her forearm. it could have
been bone, or ivory, but was neither. no one alive knew what it was made of.
egwene had never seen the wand before, but she recognized it from a
lecture anaiya had given the novices. one of the few saangreal, and perhaps


 the most powerful, that the tower possessed. saangreal had no power of
their own, of coursethey were merely devices for focusing and magnifying
what an aes sedai could channelbut with that wand, a strong aes sedai
might be able to crumple the walls of tar valon.
egwene clutched nynaeves hand on one side and elaynes on the other.
light! theyre not sure they can heal him, even with a saangrealwith that
saangreal! what chance would we have had? wed probably have killed him,
and ourselves, too. light!
i will meld the flows, the amyrlin said. be careful. the power needed
to break the bond with the dagger and heal its damage is very close to what
could kill him. i will focus. attend. she held the wand straight out in front of
her in both hands, above mats face. still unconscious, he shook his head and
tightened a fist on the daggers hilt, muttering something that sounded like a
denial.
a glow appeared around each aes sedai, that soft, white light that only a
woman who could channel could see. slowly the lights spread, until that
which seemed to emanate from one woman touched that which came from the
woman beside her, merged with it, till there was only one light, a light that, to
egwenes eyes, diminished the lamps to nothing. and in that brightness was a
stronger light still. a bar of bonewhite fire. the saangreal.
egwene fought the urge to open herself to saidar and add her flow to the
tide. it was a pull so strong she was about to be jerked off her feet. elayne
tightened her hold on her hand. nynaeve took a step toward the table, then
stopped with an angry shake of her head. light, egwene thought, i could do
it. but she did not know what it was she could do. light, its so strong. its so
wonderful. elaynes hand was trembling.
on the table, mat thrashed in the middle of the glow, jerking this way, then
that, muttering incomprehensibly. but he did not loosen his hold on the
dagger, and his eyes remained closed. slowly, ever so slowly, he began to
arch his back, muscles straining till he shook. still he fought and bucked, until
finally only his heels and his shoulders touched the table. his hand on the
dagger sprang open and, quivering, crept back from the hilt; was forced,
fighting, from the hilt. his lips skinned away from his teeth in a snarl, a
grimace of pain, and his breath came in forced grunts.
they are killing him, egwene whispered. the amyrlin is killing him!
we have to do something.
just as softly, nynaeve said, if we stop themif we could stop them


 hell die. i do not think i could handle half that much of the power. she
paused as if she had just heard her own wordsthat she could channel half of
what ten full aes sedai did with a saangrealand her voice grew even
fainter. light help me, i want to.
she fell silent abruptly. did she mean that she wanted to help mat, or that
she wanted to channel that flow of power? egwene could feel that urge in
herself, like a song that compelled her to dance.
we must trust them, nynaeve said in an intense whisper, finally. he has
no other chance.
suddenly mat shouted, loud and strong. muaddrin tia dar allende
cabadrin rhadiem! arched and struggling, eyes squeezed shut, he bellowed
the words clearly. los valdar cuebiyari! los! carai an caldazar! al
caldazar!
egwene frowned. she had learned enough to recognize the old tongue, if
not to understand more than a few words. carai an caldazar! al caldazar!
for the honor of the red eagle! for the red eagle! ancient battle cries of
manetheren, a nation that had vanished during the trolloc wars. a nation that
had stood where the two rivers was now. that much, she knew; but in some
way it seemed for a moment that she should understand the rest, too, as if the
meaning were just out of sight, and all she had to do was turn her head to
know.
with a loud pop of tearing leather, the goldensheathed dagger rose from
mats belt, hung a foot above his straining body. the ruby glittered, seemed to
send off crimson sparks, as if it, too, fought the healing.
mats eyes opened, and he glared at the women standing around him. mia
ayende, aes sedai! caballein misain ye! inde muagdhe aes sedai misain ye!
mia ayende! and he began to scream, a roar of rage that went on and on, till
egwene wondered that he had breath left in him.
hurriedly anaiya bent to lift a dark metal box from under the table, moving
as if it were heavy. when she set it beside mat and opened the lid, only a
small space was revealed within sides at least two inches thick. anaiya bent
again for a set of tongs such as a goodwife might use in her kitchen, and
grasped the floating dagger in them as carefully as if it were a poisonous
snake.
mats scream grew frantic. the ruby shone furiously, flashing bloodred.
the aes sedai thrust the dagger into the box and snapped the lid down,


 letting out a loud sigh as it clicked shut. a filthy thing, she said.
as soon as the dagger was hidden, mats shriek cut off, and he collapsed as
if muscle and bone had turned to water. an instant later the glow surrounding
aes sedai and table winked out.
done, the amyrlin said hoarsely, as if she had been the one screaming.
it is done.
some of the aes sedai sagged visibly, and sweat beaded on more than one
brow. anaiya pulled a plain linen handkerchief from her sleeve and wiped her
face openly. the cooleyed white dabbed almost surreptitiously at her cheeks
with a bit of lugard lace.
fascinating, verin said. that the old blood could flow so strongly in
anyone today. she and serafelle put their heads together, talking softly, but
with many gestures.
is he healed? nynaeve said. will he . . . live?
mat lay as if sleeping, but his face still had that hollowcheeked gauntness.
egwene had never heard of a healing that did not cure everything. unless just
separating him from the dagger took all of the power they used. light!
brendas, the amyrlin said, will you see that he is taken back to his
room?
as you command, mother, the cooleyed woman said, her curtsy as
emotionless as she herself seemed. when she left to summon bearers, several
of the other aes sedai left, too, including anaiya. verin and serafelle
followed, still talking to one another too quietly for egwene to make out what
they said.
is mat all right? nynaeve demanded. sheriam raised her eyebrows.
the amyrlin seat turned toward them. he is as well as he can be, she
said coldly. only time will tell. carrying something with shadar logoths
taint for so long . . . who knows what effect it will have on him? perhaps
none, perhaps much. we will see. but the bond with the dagger is broken.
now he needs rest, and as much food as can be gotten into him. he should
live.
what was that he was shouting, mother? elayne asked, then hastily
added, if i may ask.
he was ordering soldiers. the amyrlin gave the young man lying on the
table a quizzical look. he had not moved since collapsing, but egwene


 thought his breathing seemed easier, the rise and fall of his chest more
rhythmic. in a battle two thousand years gone, i would say. the old blood
comes again.
it was not all about a battle, nynaeve said. i heard him say aes sedai.
that was no battle. mother, she added belatedly.
for a moment the amyrlin seemed to consider, perhaps what to say,
perhaps whether to say anything. for a time, she said finally, i believe the
past and the present were one. he was there, and he was here, and he knew
who we were. he commanded us to release him. she paused again.  i am a
free man, aes sedai. i am no aes sedai meat. that is what he said.
leane sniffed loudly, and some of the other aes sedai muttered angrily
under their breath.
but, mother, egwene said, he could not have meant it as it sounds.
manetheren was allied with tar valon.
manetheren was an ally, child, the amyrlin told her, but who can know
the heart of a man? not even he himself, i suspect. a man is the easiest
animal to put on a leash, and the hardest to keep leashed. even when he
chooses it himself.
mother, sheriam said, it is late. the cooks will be waiting for these
helpers.
mother, egwene asked anxiously, could we not stay with mat? if he
may still die. . . .
the amyrlins look was level, her face without expression. you have
chores to do, child.
it was not scrubbing pots she meant. egwene was sure of that. yes,
mother. she curtsied, her skirts brushing nynaeves and elaynes as they
made theirs. one last time she looked at mat, then followed sheriam out. mat
had still not moved.


 c h a p t e r
1 9


awakening


mat opened his eyes slowly and stared up at the white plaster ceiling,
wondering where he was and how he had come there. an intricate fringe of
gilded leaves bordered the ceiling, and the mattress under his back felt
plumped full of feathers. somewhere rich, then. somewhere with money. but
his head was empty of the where and the how, and a lot more besides.
he had been dreaming, and bits of those dreams still tumbled together with
memories in his head. he could not separate one from the other. wild flights
and fights, strange people from across the ocean, ways and portal stones and
pieces of other lives, things right out of a gleemans tales, these had to be
dreams. at least, he thought they must be. but loial was no dream, and he
was an ogier. chunks of conversations drifted around in his thoughts, talks
with his father, with friends, with moiraine, and a beautiful woman, and a
ship captain, and a welldressed man who spoke to him like a father giving
sage advice. those were probably real. but it was all bits and fragments.
drifting.
muaddrin tia dar allende cabadrin rhadiem, he murmured. the words
were only sounds, yet they sparkedsomething.
the packed lines of spearmen stretched a mile or more to either side below
him, dotted with the pennants and banners of towns and cities and minor
houses. the river secured his flank on the left, the bogs and mires on the
right. from the hillside he watched the spearmen struggle against the mass of
trollocs trying to break through, ten times the humans number. spears
pierced black trolloc mail, and spiked axes carved bloody gaps in the human
ranks. screams and bellows harried the air. the sun burned hot overhead in a
cloudless sky, and shimmers of heat rose above the battle line. arrows still


 rained down from the enemy, slaying trolloc and human alike. he had called
his archers back, but the dreadlords did not care so long as they broke his
line. on the ridge behind him, the heart guard awaited his command, horses
stamping impatiently. armor on men and horses alike shone silver in the
sunlight; neither men nor animals could stand the heat much longer.
they must win here or die. he was known as a gambler; it was time to toss
the dice. in a voice that carried over the tumult below, he gave the order as he
swung up into his saddle. footmen prepare to pass cavalry forward! his
bannerman rode close beside him, the red eagle banner flapping over his
head, as the command was repeated up and down the line.
below, the spearmen suddenly moved, sidestepping with good discipline,
narrowing their formations, opening wide gaps between. gaps into which the
trollocs poured, roaring bestial cries, like a black, oozing tide of death.
he drew his sword, raised it high. forward the heart guard! he dug his
heels in, and his mount leaped down the slope. behind him, hooves thundered
in the charge. forward! he was first to strike into the trollocs, his sword
rising and falling, his bannerman close behind. for the honor of the red
eagle! the heart guard pounded into the gaps between the spearmen,
smashing the tide, hurling it back. the red eagle! halfhuman faces
snarled at him, oddly curved swords sought him, but he cut his way ever
deeper. win or die. manetheren!
mats hand trembled as he raised it to his forehead. los valdar
cuebiyari, he muttered. he was almost sure he knew what it meant
forward the heart guard, or maybe the heart guard will advance
but that could not be. moiraine had told him a few words of the old tongue,
and those were all he knew of it. the rest might as well be magpie chatter.
crazy, he said roughly. it probably isnt even the old tongue at all. just
gibberish. that aes sedai is crazy. it was only a dream.
aes sedai. moiraine. he suddenly became aware of his toothin wrist and
bony hand, and looked at them. he had been sick. something to do with a
dagger. a dagger with a ruby in the hilt, and a longdead, tainted city called
shadar logoth. it was all foggy and distant, and made no real sense, but he
knew it was no dream. egwene and nynaeve had been taking him to tar
valon to be healed. he remembered that much.
he tried to sit up, and fell back, as weak as a newborn lamb. laboriously,
he pulled himself up and shoved the single woolen blanket aside. his clothes
were gone, perhaps into the vinecarved wardrobe standing against the wall.


 for the moment he did not care about clothes. he struggled to his feet,
tottered across the flowered carpet to cling to a highbacked armchair, and
lurched from the chair to the table, gilded scrolls on its legs and edges.
beeswax candles, four to each tall stand and small mirrors behind the
flames, lit the room brightly. a larger mirror on the wall above the highly
polished washstand threw his reflection back at him, gaunt and wasted,
cheeks hollow and dark eyes sunken, hair sweatmatted, bent like an old man
and wavering like pasture grass in a breeze. he made himself stand straight,
but it was not much improvement.
a large, covered tray sat on the table in front of his hands, and his nose
caught the smells of food. he twitched aside the cloth, revealing two large
silver pitchers and dishes of thin green porcelain. he had heard that the sea
folk charged its weight in silver for that porcelain. he had expected beef tea,
or sweetbreads, the kinds of things invalids had pushed on them. instead, one
plate held slices of a beef roast piled thickly, with brown mustard and
horseradish. on others there were roasted potatoes, sweetbeans with onions,
cabbage, and butterpeas. pickles, and a wedge of yellow cheese. thick slices
of crusty bread, and a dish of butter. one pitcher was filled with milk and still
beaded with condensation on the outside, the other with what smelled like
spiced wine. there was enough of everything for four men. his mouth
watered, and his stomach growled at him.
first i find out where i am. but he rolled up a slice of beef and dipped it in
the mustard before pushing himself away from the table toward the three tall,
narrow windows.
wooden shutters carved in lacy patterns covered them, but through the
holes he could see that it was night outside. lights from other windows made
dots in the blackness. for a moment he sagged against the white stone
windowsill in frustration, but then he began to think.
you can turn the worst that comes to your advantage if you only think, his
father always said, and certainly abell cauthon was the best horse trader in
the two rivers. when it seemed somebody had taken advantage of mats
father, it always turned out they had gotten the greasy end of the stick. not
that abell cauthon ever did anything dishonest, but even taren ferry folk
never got the best of him, and everybody knew how close to the bone they
cut. all because he thought about things from every side that there was.
tar valon. it had to be tar valon. this room belonged in a palace. the
flowered domani carpet alone probably cost as much as a farm. more, he did


 not think he was sick any longer, and from what he had been told, tar valon
was his only chance to get well. he had never actually felt sick, not that he
remembered, not even when verinanother name swam out of the hazehad
told someone nearby that he was dying. now he felt weak as a babe and
hungry as a starving wolf, but somehow, he was sure the healing had been
done. i feelwhole and well, thats all. ive been healed. he grimaced at the
shutters.
healed. that meant they had used the one power on him. the notion sent
goose bumps marching across his skin, but he had known it would be done.
better than dying, he told himself. some of the stories he had heard about
aes sedai came back. it has to be better than dying. even nynaeve thought i
was going to die. anyway, its done, and worrying about it now wont help
anything. he realized he had finished the slice of beef and was licking its
juice from his fingers.
unsteadily, he made his way back to the table. there was a stool
underneath. he pulled it out and sat down. not bothering with knife or fork,
he made another roll of beef. how could he turn being in tar valonin the
white tower. it has to beto his advantage?
tar valon meant aes sedai. that was certainly no reason to stay even an
hour. exactly the opposite. what he remembered of his time with moiraine,
and later with verin, was not much to go on. he could not recall either of
them doing anything really terrible, but then he could not recall a great deal of
that time at all. anyway, whatever aes sedai did, they did for their own
reasons.
and those arent always the reasons you think they are, he mumbled
around a mouthful of potato, then swallowed. an aes sedai never lies, but
the truth an aes sedai tells you isnt always the truth you think it is. thats
one thing i have to remember: i cant be sure about them even when i think i
know. it was not a cheering conclusion. he filled his mouth with butterpeas.
thinking about aes sedai made him remember a little about them. the
seven ajahs: blue, red, brown, green, yellow, white, and gray. the reds
were the worst. except for that black ajah they all claim doesnt exist. but the
red ajah should be no threat to him. they were only interested in men who
could channel.
rand. burn me, how could i forget that? where is he? is he all right? he
sighed regretfully, and spread butter on a piece of stillwarm bread. i wonder
if hes gone mad yet.


 even if he knew the answers, he could do nothing to help rand. he was not
sure he would if he could. rand could channel, and mat had grown up with
stories of men channeling, stories to frighten children. stories that frightened
adults, too, because some of them were all too true. discovering what rand
could do had been like finding out his best friend tortured small animals and
killed babies. once you finally made yourself believe it, it was hard to call
him a friend any longer.
i have to look out for myself, he said angrily. he upended the wine
pitcher over his silver cup and was surprised to find it empty. he filled the
cup with milk, instead. egwene and nynaeve want to be aes sedai. he had
not really remembered that until he said it aloud. rand is following moiraine
around and calling himself the dragon reborn. the light knows what perrin
is up to. hes been acting crazy ever since his eyes turned funny. i have to
look out for myself. burn me, i have to! im the last one of us whos still
sane. theres only me.
tar valon. well, it was supposed to be the wealthiest city in the world, and
it was the center of trade between the borderlands and the south, the center of
aes sedai power. he did not think he could get an aes sedai to gamble with
him. or trust the fall of the dice or the turn of the cards if he did. but there
had to be merchants, and others with silver and gold. the city itself would be
worth a few days. he knew he had traveled far since leaving the two rivers,
but aside from a few vague memories of caemlyn and cairhien, he could
remember nothing of any great cities. he had always wanted to see a great
city.
but not one full of aes sedai, he muttered sourly, scraping up the last of
the butterpeas. he gulped them down and went back for another helping of
beef.
idly, he wondered if the aes sedai might let him have the ruby from the
shadar logoth dagger. he remembered the dagger in only the fuzziest way,
but even that was like remembering a terrible injury. his insides knotted up,
and sharp pain dug at his temples. yet the ruby was clear in his mind, as big
as his thumbnail, dark as a drop of blood, glittering like some crimson eye.
surely he had more claim to it than they did, and it had to be worth as much
as a dozen farms back home.
theyll probably say it is tainted, too. and likely it was. still he spun a
little fancy of trading the ruby to some of the coplins for their best land. most
of that familytroublemakers from the cradle, where they were not thieves
and liars as welldeserved whatever happened to them and more. but he


 really did not believe the aes sedai would give it back to him, did not relish
the notion of carrying it as far as emonds field if they did. and the thought
of owning the largest farm in the two rivers was no longer as exciting as it
once had been. once that had been his biggest ambition, that, and to be
known as his fathers equal as a horse trader. now it seemed such a small
thing to want. a cramped thing, with the whole wide world just waiting out
there.
first off, he decided, he would find egwene and nynaeve. maybe theyve
come to their senses. maybe theyve given up this foolishness about becoming
aes sedai. he did not think they would have, but he could not go without
seeing them. he would go; that was sure. a visit with them, a day to see the
city, perhaps a game with the dice to pad out his purse, and then he would be
off for somewhere where there were no aes sedai. before he returned home
i will go home one day. one day, i willhe meant to see something of the
world, and without any aes sedai making him dance to her tune.
rummaging around the tray for something more to eat, he was shocked to
realize nothing was left but smears and a few crumbs of bread and cheese.
the pitchers were both empty. he squinted down at his stomach in wonder.
he should have been stuffed to the ears with all that in him, but he felt as if he
had hardly eaten at all. he scraped the last bits of cheese together between
thumb and forefinger. halfway to his mouth, his hand froze.
i blew the horn of valere. softly he whistled a bit of tune, then cut it short
when the words came to him:
im down at the bottom of the well.
its night, and the rain is coming down.
the sides are falling in,
and theres no rope to climb.
im down at the bottom of the well.
there had better be a bloody rope to climb, he whispered. he let the
cheese crumbs fall on the tray. for the moment he felt sick again.
determinedly he tried to think, tried to penetrate the fog that shrouded
everything in his head.
verin had been bringing the horn to tar valon, but he could not remember
if she knew he was the one who had blown it. she had never said anything to
make him think so. he was sure of that. he thought he was. so what if she


 does know? what if they all do? unless verin did something with it i dont
know about, they have the horn. they dont need me. but who could say what
aes sedai thought they needed?
if they ask, he said grimly, i never even touched it. if they know. . . . if
they know, ill . . . ill handle that when it comes. burn me, they cant want
anything from me. they cant!
a soft knock on the door brought him swaying to his feet, ready to run. if
there had been any place to run to, and if he could have managed more than
three steps. but there was not, and he could not.
the door opened.


 c h a p t e r
2 0


visitations


the woman who came in, dressed all in white silk and silver, shut the door
behind her and leaned back against it to study him with the darkest eyes mat
had ever seen. she was so beautiful he almost forgot to breathe, with hair as
black as night held by a finely woven silver band, and as graceful in repose as
another woman would be dancing. he halfway thought that he knew her, but
he rejected the idea out of hand. no man could ever forget a woman like her.
you may be passable, i suppose, once you fill out again, she said, but
for now, perhaps you could put on something.
for an instant mat continued to stare at her; then suddenly he realized he
was standing there naked. face scarlet, he shambled to the bed, pulled the
blanket around himself like a cloak, and more fell than sat down on the edge
of the mattress. im sorry for . . . i mean, i . . . that is, i didnt expect . . . i
. . . i . . . he drew a deep breath. i apologize for your finding me this way.
he could still feel the heat in his cheeks. for a moment he wished that
rand, whatever he had become, or even perrin were there to advise him. they
always seemed to get on well with women. even girls who knew that rand
was all but promised to egwene used to stare at him, and they seemed to think
perrins slow ways were gentle and attractive. however hard he tried, he
always managed to make a fool of himself in front of girls. as he had just
done.
i would not have visited you in this way, mat, except that i was here in the
. . . in the white tower she smiled as if the name amused herfor
another purpose, and i wanted to see all of you. mats face reddened again,
and he tugged the blanket around him tighter, but she seemed not to have


 been teasing him. more graceful than a swan, she glided to the table. you are
hungry. thats to be expected, the way they do things. make sure you eat all
they give you. you will be surprised at how quickly you put weight back and
regain strength.
pardon, mat said diffidently, but do i know you? meaning no offense,
but you seem . . . familiar. she looked at him until he began to shift uneasily.
a woman like her would expect to be remembered.
you may have seen me, she said finally. somewhere. call me selene.
her head tilted slightly; she appeared to be waiting for him to recognize the
name.
it tugged at the edges of memory. he thought he must have heard it before,
but he could not say when or where. are you an aes sedai, selene?
no. the word was soft but surprisingly emphatic.
for the first time, he studied her, able now to see more than her beauty. she
was almost as tall as he was, slender and, he suspected from the way she
moved, strong. he was not sure of her agea year or two older than he, or
maybe as much as tenbut her cheeks were smooth. her necklace of smooth
white stones and woven silver matched her wide belt, but she did not wear a
great serpent ring. the absence should not have surprised himno aes
sedai would ever say right out that she was notyet it did. there was an air
about hera selfconfidence, a surety in her own power to match any
queens, and something morethat he associated with aes sedai.
you arent by any chance a novice, are you? he had heard that novices
wore white, but he could not really believe it of her. she makes elayne look
like a cringer. elayne. another name drifting into his head.
hardly that, selene said with a wry twist to her mouth. let us just say
that i am someone whose interests coincide with yours. these . . . aes sedai
mean to use you, but you will like it, in the main, i think. and accept it. there
is no need to convince you to seek out glory.
use me? the memory returned to him of thinking that, but about rand,
that the aes sedai meant to use rand, not him. theyve no bloody use for me.
light, they cant have! what do you mean? im no one important. i am no
use to anyone but myself. what kind of glory?
i knew that would pull you. you, above all.
her smile made his head spin. he scrubbed a hand through his hair. the
blanket slipped, and he caught it hastily before it could fall. now listen, they


 are not interested in me. what about me sounding the horn? i am just a
farmer. maybe they think im tied to rand in some way. no, verin said. . . .
he was not sure what verin had said, or moiraine, but he thought most aes
sedai knew nothing at all about rand. he wanted to keep it that way, at least
until he was a long way gone. just a simple country man. i only want to see a
little of the world and go back to my das farm. what does she mean, glory?
selene shook her head as if she had heard his thoughts. you are more
important than you yet know. certainly more important than these socalled
aes sedai know. you can have glory, if you know enough not to trust them.
you certainly sound as if you dont trust them. socalled? a thought
came to him, but he could not manage to say it. are you a . . . ? are you . . .
? it was not the kind of thing you accused someone of.
a darkfriend? selene said mockingly. she sounded amused, not angered.
she sounded contemptuous. one of those pathetic followers of baalzamon
who think he will give them immortality and power? i follow no one. there is
one man i could stand beside, but i do not follow.
mat laughed nervously. of course not. blood and ashes, a darkfriend
wouldnt name herself darkfriend. probably has a poisoned knife, if she is.
he had a vague memory of a woman dressed as one nobly born, a darkfriend
with a deadly dagger in her slender hand. that wasnt what i meant at all.
you look. . . . you look like a queen. thats what i meant. are you a lady?
mat, mat, you must learn to trust me. oh, i will use you, tooyou have
too suspicious a nature, especially since carrying that dagger, for me to deny
itbut my use will gain you wealth, and power, and glory. i will not compel
you. i have always believed men perform better if convinced rather than
forced. these aes sedai do not even realize how important you are, and he
will try to dissuade or kill you, but i can give you what you desire.
he? mat said sharply. kill me? light, its rand they were after, not me.
how does she know about the dagger? i suppose the whole tower knows.
who wants to kill me?
selenes mouth tightened as if she had said too much. you know what you
want, mat, and i know it every bit as well as you. you must choose who you
will trust to gain it for you. i admit i will use you. these aes sedai will never
do that. i will lead you to wealth and glory. they will keep you tied to a leash
until you die.
you say a lot, mat said, but how do i know any of it is true? how do i
know i can trust you any more than i can them?


 by listening to what they tell you, and what they do not. will they tell you
your father came to tar valon?
my da was here?
a man named abell cauthon, and another named tam althor. they
made nuisances of themselves until they gained an audience, i have heard,
wanting to know where you and your friends were. and siuan sanche sent
them back to the two rivers with empty hands, not even letting them know
you were alive. will they tell you that, unless you ask? perhaps not even then,
for you might try to run away back home.
my da thinks i am dead? mat said slowly.
he can be told you live. i can see to it. think on who to trust, mat
cauthon. will they tell you that even now rand althor is trying to escape,
and the one called moiraine is hunting him? will they tell you that the black
ajah infests their precious white tower? will they even tell you how they
mean to use you?
rand is trying to escape? but maybe she knew rand had proclaimed
himself the dragon reborn, and maybe she did not, but he would not tell her.
the black ajah! blood and bloody ashes! who are you, selene? if youre
not aes sedai, what are you?
her smile hid secrets. just remember that there is another choice. you
need not be a puppet for the white tower or prey for baalzamons
darkfriends. the world is more complex than you can imagine. do as these
aes sedai wish for the present, but remember your choices. will you do
that?
i dont see that i have much choice at all, he said glumly. i suppose i
will.
selenes look sharpened. friendliness sloughed off her voice like an old
snake skin. suppose? i did not come to you like this, talk in this way, for
suppose, matrim cauthon. she stretched out a slim hand.
her hand was empty, and she stood halfway across the room, but he leaned
back, away from her hand, as if she were right on top of him with a dagger.
he did not know why, really, except that there was a threat in her eyes, and he
was sure it was real. his skin began to tingle, and his headache returned.
suddenly tingle and pain vanished together, and selenes head whipped
around as if listening to something beyond the walls. a tiny frown appeared
on her face, and she lowered her hand. the frown vanished. we will talk


 again, mat. i have much to say to you. remember your choices. remember
that there are many hands that would kill you. i alone guarantee you life, and
all you seek, if you do as i say. she slipped out of the door as silently and
gracefully as she had entered.
mat let out a long breath. sweat ran down his face. who in the light is she?
a darkfriend, perhaps. except that she had sounded as contemptuous of
baalzamon as she was of aes sedai. darkfriends spoke of baalzamon the
way anyone else might speak of the creator. and she had not asked him to
conceal her visit from the aes sedai.
right, he thought sourly. pardon me, aes sedai, but this woman came to
see me. she wasnt aes sedai, but i think maybe she started to use the one
power on me, and she said she wasnt a darkfriend, but she did say you mean
to use me, and the black ajahs in your tower. oh, and she said im
important. i dont know how. you dont mind if i leave now, do you?
going was beginning to be a better idea by the minute. he slid awkwardly
off the bed and made his way unsteadily to the wardrobe, still clutching his
blanket around him. his boots were on the floor inside, and his cloak hung
from a peg, under his belt, with pouch and sheathed belt knife. it was just a
country knife, with a stout blade, but it could do as much as any fine dagger.
the rest of his clothestwo sturdy wool coats, three pairs of breeches, half a
dozen linen shirts and smallclotheshad been brushed or washed as required,
and neatly folded on the shelves that took up one side of the wardrobe. he felt
the pouch hanging from the belt, but it was empty. its contents lay jumbled on
a shelf with what had been emptied from his pockets.
he brushed aside a redhawks feather, a smooth, striped rock he had liked
the colors of, his razor, and his bonehandled pocketknife, and freed his washleather purse from some coils of spare bowstring. when he tugged it open, he
found his memory had been all too good in this instance.
two silver marks and a handful of copper, he muttered. i wont get far
on that. once it would have seemed a small fortune to him, but that had been
before he left emonds field.
he stooped to peer back into the shelf. where are they? he began to be
afraid the aes sedai might have thrown them out, the way his mother would
if she had ever found them. where . . . ? he felt a surge of relief. way in the
back, behind his tinderbox and ball of twine for snares and the like, were his
two leather dice cups.
they rattled as he pulled them out, but he still popped off the tightfitting


 round caps. everything was as it should be. five dice carved with symbols,
for crowns, and five marked with spots. the spotted dice would do for a
number of games, but more men seemed to play crowns than anything else.
with these, his two marks would become enough to take him far away from
tar valon. away from aes sedai and selene, both.
a peremptory knock was followed immediately by the door opening. he
whirled around. the amyrlin seat and the keeper of the chronicles were
entering. he would have recognized them even without the amyrlins broad,
striped stole, and the keepers narrower blue stole. he had seen them once
and only once, a long way from tar valon, but he could not forget the two
most powerful women among the aes sedai.
the amyrlins eyebrows rose at the sight of him standing there with the
blanket hanging from his shoulders and his purse and dice cups in his hands.
i dont think you will need those for a while yet, my son, she said dryly.
put them up and get back to bed before you fall on your face.
he hesitated, his back stiffening, but his knees chose that moment to
wobble, and the two aes sedai were looking at him, dark eyes and blue alike
appearing to read his every rebellious thought. he did as he was told, holding
the blanket around him with both hands. he lay down straight as a board, not
sure what else he could do.
how are you feeling? the amyrlin asked briskly as she put a hand on his
head. goose bumps covered his skin. had she done something with the one
power, or was it being touched by an aes sedai that made him feel a chill?
im fine, he told her. why, i am ready to be on my way. just let me say
goodbye to egwene and nynaeve, and ill be out of your hair. i mean, i will
go . . . uh, mother. moiraine and verin had not seemed to care much how he
talked, but this was the amyrlin seat, after all.
nonsense, the amyrlin said. she pulled the highbacked chair around,
closer to the bed, and sat, addressing leane. men always seem to refuse to
admit they are sick until theyre sick enough to make twice as much work for
women. then they claim theyre well too soon, with the same result.
the keeper glanced at mat and nodded. yes, mother, yet this one cannot
claim he is well when he can barely stand up. at least he has eaten everything
on his tray.
id be surprised if he had left enough crumbs to interest a finch. and still
hungry, unless i miss my guess.


 i could have someone bring him a pie, mother. or some cakes.
no, i think he has had as much as he can hold for now. if he brings it all
back up, it wont do him any good.
mat scowled. it seemed to him that when you got sick, you became
invisible to women unless they were actually talking to you. and then they
took at least ten years off your age. nynaeve, his mother, his sisters, the
amyrlin seat, they all did it.
im not hungry at all, he announced. i am fine. if you will let me put my
clothes on, ill show you how well i am. i will be out of here before you know
it. they were both looking at him, now. he cleared his throat. uh . . .
mother.
the amyrlin snorted. youve eaten a meal for five, and you will eat three
or four like it every day for days yet, or else you will starve to death. youve
just been healed from a link to the evil that killed every man, woman, and
child in aridhol, and no less strong for near two thousand years waiting for
you to pick it up. it was killing you just as surely as it killed them. that is not
like having a fish spine stuck in your thumb, boy. we very nearly killed you
ourselves trying to save you.
i am not hungry, he maintained. his stomach growled loudly to give him
the lie.
i read you aright the first time i saw you, the amyrlin said. i knew right
then youd bolt like a startled fisherbird if you ever thought someone was
trying to hold you. as well i took precautions.
he eyed them warily. precautions? they looked back, all serenity. he felt
as if their eyes were pinning him to the bed.
your name and description are on their way to the bridge guards, the
amyrlin said, and the dockmasters. ill not try to hold you inside the tower,
but you will not leave tar valon until you are well. should you try to hide in
the city, hunger will drive you back here eventually, or if it doesnt, we will
find you before you starve.
why do you want to keep me here so badly? he demanded. he heard
selenes voice. they want to use you. why should you care whether i starve
or not? i can feed myself.
the amyrlin gave a small laugh with little amusement in it. with two
silver marks and a handful of copper, my son? your dice would need to be
very lucky indeed to buy all the food youll need in the next few days. we do


 not heal people, then let them waste our efforts by dying while they still need
care. in addition to which, you may yet need more healing.
more? you said you had healed me. why should i need more?
my son, you carried that dagger for months. i believe we dug every trace
of it out of you, but if we missed even the smallest speck, it could still be
fatal. and who knows what effect your having it in your possession so long
may have? half a year from now, a year, and you may wish you had an aes
sedai to hand to heal you again.
you want me to stay here a year? he said incredulously, and loudly.
leane shifted her feet and eyed him sharply, but the amyrlins calm features
were unruffled.
perhaps not so long as that, my son. long enough to be certain, though.
surely you want as much. would you set sail in a boat when you didnt know
whether the caulking would hold, or whether a plank might be rotten?
i never had much to do with boats, mat muttered. it might be true. aes
sedai never lied, but there were too many mights and mays in it for him. ive
been gone from home a long time, mother. my da and my mother probably
think i am dead.
if you wish to write a letter to them, i will see that it is carried to emonds
field.
mat waited for more, but no more came. thank you, mother. he essayed
a small laugh. im half surprised my da did not come looking for me. hes
the kind of man who would. he was not sure, but he thought there was a
small hesitation before the amyrlin answered.
he did come. leane spoke to him.
the keeper took it up immediately. we did not know where you were
then, mat. i told him so, and he left before the heavy snows. i gave him some
gold to make the journey home easier.
no doubt, the amyrlin said, he will be pleased to hear from you. and
your mother will, certainly. give me the letter when you have written it, and i
will see to it.
they had told him, but he had had to ask. and they didnt mention rands
da. maybe because they didnt think i would care, and maybe because. . . .
burn me, i dont know. who can tell with aes sedai? i was traveling with a
friend, mother. rand althor. you remember him. do you know if he is all


 right? ill bet his da is worried, too.
as far as i know, the amyrlin said smoothly, the boy is well enough, but
who can say? i have seen him only once, the time i saw you, in fal dara.
she turned to the keeper. perhaps he could do with a small piece of pie,
leane. and something for his throat, if he is going to do all this talking. will
you see that it is brought to him?
the tall aes sedai left with a murmured, as you command, mother.
when the amyrlin turned back to mat, she was smiling, but her eyes were
blue ice. there are things it would be dangerous for you to talk about,
perhaps even in front of leane. a flapping tongue has killed more men than
sudden storms ever did.
dangerous, mother? his mouth felt suddenly parched, but he resisted the
urge to lick his lips. light, how much does she know about rand? if only
moiraine didnt keep so many secrets. mother, i dont know anything
dangerous. i can hardly remember half of what i do know.
do you remember the horn?
what horn is that, mother?
she was on her feet and looming over him so fast he hardly saw her move.
you play games with me, boy, and i will make you weep for your mother to
come running. i have no time for games, and neither do you. now, doyou
remember?
clutching the blanket tightly around him, he had to swallow before he
could say, i remember, mother.
she seemed to relax, just a little, and mat shrugged his shoulders queasily.
he felt as if he had just been allowed to lift them off a chopping block.
good. that is good, mat. she sat back down slowly, studying him. do
you know that you are linked to the horn? he mouthed the word linked
silently, shocked, and she nodded. i did not think you knew. you were first to
blow the horn of valere after it was found. for you, it will summon dead
heroes back from the grave. for anyone else, it is only a hornso long as you
live.
he took a deep breath. so long as i live, he said in a dull voice, and the
amyrlin nodded. you could have let me die. she nodded again. then you
could have had anyone you want blow it, and it would have worked for
them. another nod. blood and ashes! you mean me to blow it for you.


 when the last battle comes, you mean me to call heroes back from the grave
to fight the dark one for you. blood and bloody ashes!
she put an elbow on the arm of the chair and propped her chin on her hand.
her eyes never left him. would you prefer the alternative?
he frowned, then remembered what the alternative was. if someone else
had to sound the horn. . . . you want me to blow the horn? then ill blow
the horn. i never said i would not, did i?
the amyrlin gave an exasperated sigh. you remind me of my uncle huan.
no one could ever pin him down. he liked to gamble, too, and hed much
rather have fun than work. he died pulling children out of a burning house.
he wouldnt stop going back as long as there was one left inside. are you like
him, mat? will you be there when the flames are high?
he could not meet her eyes. he studied his fingers as they plucked irritably
at his blanket. im no hero. i do what i have to do, but i am no hero.
most of those we call heroes only did what they had to do. i suppose it
will have to be enough. for now. you must not speak to anyone but me of the
horn, my son. or of your link to it.
for now? he thought. its all you are going to bloody get, now or ever. i
dont mean to bloody tell everybo she arched an eyebrow, and he made
his voice smooth again. i do not want to tell anyone. i wish nobody knew.
why do you want to keep it such a secret? dont you trust your aes sedai?
for a long moment he thought he had gone too far. her face hardened, and
her look could have carved axe handles.
if i could make it so that only you and i knew, she said coldly, i would.
the more people know a thing, the more the knowledge spreads, even with
the best will. most of the world believes the horn of valere is only legend,
and those who know better believe one of the hunters has yet to find it. but
shayol ghul knows it has been found, and that means at least some
darkfriends know.
but they do not know where it is, and, if the light shines on us, they do not
know you sounded it. do you really want darkfriends coming after you?
halfmen, or other shadowspawn? they want the horn. you must know that.
it will work as well for the shadow as for the light. but if it is to work for
them, they must take you, or kill you. do you want to risk that?
mat wished he had another blanket, and maybe a goosedown comforter.
the room suddenly felt very cold. are you telling me darkfriends could


 come after me here? i thought the white tower could keep darkfriends out.
he remembered what selene had said about the black ajah, and wondered
what the amyrlin would say to that.
a good reason to stay, wouldnt you say? she got to her feet, smoothing
her skirts. rest, my son. soon you will feel much better. rest. she closed
the door softly behind her.
for a long time mat lay staring up at the ceiling. he barely noticed when a
serving woman came with his piece of pie and another pitcher of milk, taking
the tray of empty dishes when she went. his stomach rumbled loudly at the
warm smell of apples and spices, but he paid that no mind, either. the
amyrlin thought she held him like a sheep in a pen. and selene. . . . who in
the light is she? what does she want? selene had been right about some
things; but the amyrlin had told him she meant to use him, and how. in a way.
there were too many holes in what she had said to suit him, too many holes
she could slip something deadly through. the amyrlin wanted something,
and selene wanted something, and he was the rope they were tugging
between them. he thought he would rather face trollocs than be caught
between those two.
there had to be a way out of tar valon, a way out of both their grasps.
once he was beyond the river, he could keep out of aes sedai hands, and
selenes, and darkfriends, too. he was sure of it. there had to be a way. all
he had to do was think about it from every angle.
the pie grew cold on the table.


 c h a p t e r
2 1


a world of dreams


egwene scrubbed her hands with a hand towel as she hurried down the
dimly lit corridor. she had washed them twice, but they still felt greasy. she
had not thought there could be so many pots in the world. and today had been
bake day, so buckets of ashes had had to be hauled from the ovens. and the
hearths cleaned. and the tables rubbed bonewhite with fine sand, and the
floors scrubbed on hands and knees. ash and grease stained her white dress.
her back ached, and she wanted to be in her bed, but verin had come to the
kitchens, supposedly for a meal to eat in her rooms, and whispered a
summons to her in passing.
verin had her quarters above the library, in corridors used only by a few
other brown sisters. there was a dusty air to the halls there, as if the women
who lived along them were too busy with other things to bother having the
servants clean very often, and the passages took odd turns and twists,
sometimes dipping or rising unexpectedly. the tapestries were few, their
colorful weavings dulled, apparently cleaned as seldom as everything else
here. many of the lamps were unlit, plunging much of the hall into gloom.
egwene thought she had it to herself, except for a flash of white ahead,
perhaps a novice or a servant scurrying about some task. her shoes, clicking
on bare black and white floor tiles, made echoes. it was not a comforting
place for one thinking of the black ajah.
she found what verin had told her to look for. a dark paneled door at the
top of a rise, beside a dusty tapestry of a king on horse back receiving the
surrender of another king. verin had named the pair of themmen dead
hundreds of years before artur hawkwing was born; verin always seemed to
know such thingsbut egwene could not remember their names, or the long


 vanished countries they had ruled. it was the only wall hanging she had seen
that matched verins description, though.
minus the sound of her own footsteps, the hallway seemed even emptier
than before, and more threatening. she rapped on the door, and entered
hurriedly on the heels of an absentminded who is it? come in.
one step into the room, she stopped and stared. shelves lined the walls,
except for one door that must lead to inner rooms and except for where maps
hung, often in layers, and what seemed to be charts of the night sky. she
recognized the names of some constellationsthe plowman and the
haywain, the archer and the five sistersbut others were unfamiliar. books
and papers and scrolls covered nearly every flat surface, with all sorts of odd
things interspersed among the piles, and sometimes on top of them. strange
shapes of glass or metal, spheres and tubes interlinked, and circles held inside
circles, stood among bones and skulls of every shape and description. what
appeared to be a stuffed brown owl, not much bigger than egwenes hand,
stood on what seemed to be a bleached white lizards skull, but could not be,
for the skull was longer than her arm and had crooked teeth as big as her
fingers. candlesticks had been stuck about in a haphazard fashion, giving
good light here and shadows there, although seeming in danger of setting fire
to papers in some places. the owl blinked at her, and she jumped.
ah, yes, verin said. she was seated behind a table as cluttered as
everything else in the room, a torn page held carefully in her hands. it is you.
yes. she noticed egwenes sideways glance at the owl, and said absently,
he keeps down mice. they chew paper. her gesture took in the entire
room, and reminded her of the page she held. fascinating, this. rosel of
essam claimed more than a hundred pages survived the breaking, and she
should have known, since she wrote barely two hundred years afterwards, but
only this one piece still exists, so far as i know. perhaps only this very copy.
rosel wrote that it held secrets the world could not face, and she would not
speak of them plainly. i have read this page a thousand times, trying to
decipher what she meant.
the tiny owl blinked at egwene again. she tried not to look at it. what
does it say, verin sedai?
verin blinked, very much as the owl had. what does it say? it is a direct
translation, mind, and reads almost like a bard reciting in high chant. listen.
heart of the dark. baalzamon. name hidden within name shrouded by
name. secret buried within secret cloaked by secret. betrayer of hope.
ishamael betrays all hope. truth burns and sears. hope fails before truth. a lie


 is our shield. who can stand against the heart of the dark? who can face the
betrayer of hope? soul of shadow, soul of the shadow, he is  she
stopped with a sigh. it ends there. what do you make of it?
i dont know, egwene said. i do not like it.
well, why should you, child? like it, or understand it? i have studied it
nearly forty years, and i do neither. verin carefully placed the page inside a
silklined folder of stiff leather, then casually stuffed the folder into a stack of
papers. but you did not come for that. she rummaged across the table,
muttering to herself, several times barely catching a pile of books or
manuscripts before it toppled. finally she came up with a handful of pages
covered in a thin, spidery hand and tied with nubby string. here, child.
everything that is known about liandrin and the women who went with her.
names, ages, ajahs, where they were born. everything i could find in the
records. even how they performed in their studies. what we know of the
terangreal they took, too, which isnt much. only descriptions, for the most
part. i do not know whether any of this will help. i saw nothing of any use in
this.
perhaps one of us will see something. a sudden wave of suspicion took
egwene by surprise. if she didnt leave something out. the amyrlin seemed to
trust verin only because she had to. what if verin was black ajah herself?
she gave herself a shake. she had traveled all the way from toman head to
tar valon with verin, and she refused to believe this plump scholar could be a
darkfriend. i trust you, verin sedai. can i, really?
the aes sedai blinked at her again, then dismissed whatever thought had
come to her with a shake of her head. that list i gave you may be important,
or it may be so much waste of paper, but it isnt the only reason i summoned
you. she started moving things on the table, making some shaky stacks taller
to clear a space. i understand from anaiya that you might become a
dreamer. the last was corianin nedeal, four hundred and seventythree years
ago, and from what i can make of the records, she barely deserved the name.
it would be quite interesting, if you do.
she tested me, verin sedai, but she couldnt be sure that any of my
dreams foretold the future.
that is only part of what a dreamer does, child. perhaps the least part.
anaiya believes in bringing girls along too slowly, in my opinion. look here.
with one finger, verin drew a number of parallel lines across the area she had
cleared, lines clear in dust atop the old beeswax. let these represent worlds


 that might exist if different choices had been made, if major turning points in
the pattern had gone another way.
the worlds reached by the portal stones, egwene said, to show she had
listened to verins lectures on the journey from toman head. what could this
possibly have to do with whether or not she was a dreamer?
very good. but the pattern may be even more complex than that, child.
the wheel weaves our lives to make the pattern of an age, but the ages
themselves are woven into the age lace, the great pattern. who can know if
this is even the tenth part of the weaving, though? some in the age of
legends apparently believe that there were still other worldseven harder to
reach than the worlds of the portal stones, if that can be believedlying like
this. she drew more lines, crosshatching the first set. for a moment she
stared at them. the warp and the woof of the weave. perhaps the wheel of
time weaves a still greater pattern from worlds. straightening, she dusted
her hands. well, that is neither here nor there. in all of these worlds,
whatever their other variations, a few things are constant. one is that the dark
one is imprisoned in all of them.
in spite of herself, egwene stepped closer to peer at the lines verin had
drawn. in all of them? how can that be? are you saying there is a father of
lies for each world? the thought of so many dark ones made her shiver.
no, child. there is one creator, who exists everywhere at once for all of
these worlds. in the same way, there is only one dark one, who also exists in
all of these worlds at once. if he is freed from the prison the creator made in
one world, he is freed on all. so long as he is kept prisoner in one, he remains
imprisoned on all.
that does not seem to make sense, egwene protested.
paradox, child. the dark one is the embodiment of paradox and chaos,
the destroyer of reason and logic, the breaker of balance, the unmaker of
order.
the owl suddenly took flight on silent wings, landing atop a large white
skull on a shelf behind the aes sedai. it peered down at the two women,
blinking. egwene had noticed the skull when she came in, with its curled
horns and snout, and vaguely wondered what sort of ram had so big a head.
now she took in the roundness of it, the high forehead. not a rams skull. a
trolloc.
she drew a shuddering breath. verin sedai, what does this have to do with
being a dreamer? the dark one is bound in shayol ghul, and i do not want


 to even think of him escaping. but the seals on his prison are weakening.
even novices know that, now.
do with being a dreamer? why, nothing, child. except that we must all
confront the dark one in one way or another. he is prisoned now, but the
pattern did not bring rand althor into the world for no purpose. the dragon
reborn will face the lord of the grave; that much is sure. if rand survives
that long, of course. the dark one will try to distort the pattern, if he can.
well, we have gone rather far afield, havent we?
forgive me, verin sedai, but if thisegwene indicated the lines drawn
in the dusthas nothing to do with being a dreamer, why are you telling me
about it?
verin stared at her as if she were deliberately being dense. nothing? of
course it has something to do with it, child. the point is that there is a third
constant besides the creator and the dark one. there is a world that lies
within each of these others, inside all of them at the same time. or perhaps
surrounding them. writers in the age of legends called it telaranrhiod,
the unseen world. perhaps the world of dreams is a better translation.
many peopleordinary folk who could not think of channelingsometimes
glimpse telaranrhiod in their dreams, and even catch glimmers of these
other worlds through it. think of some of the peculiar things you have seen in
your dreams. but a dreamer, childa true dreamercan enter
telaranrhiod.
egwene tried to swallow, but a lump in her throat stopped her. enter it? i
. . . i dont think i am a dreamer, verin sedai. anaiya sedais tests
verin cut her off. prove nothing one way or the other. and anaiya still
believes that you may very well be one.
i suppose i will learn whether i am or not eventually, egwene mumbled.
light, i want to be, dont i? i want to learn! i want it all.
you have no time to wait, child. the amyrlin has entrusted a great task to
you and nynaeve. you must reach out for any tool you might be able to use.
verin dug a red wooden box from under the welter on her table. the box was
large enough to hold sheets of paper, but when the aes sedai opened the lid a
crack, all she pulled out was a ring carved from stone, all flecks and stripes of
blue and brown and red, and too large to be a finger ring. here, child.
egwene shifted the papers to take it, and her eyes widened in surprise. the
ring certainly looked like stone, but it felt harder than steel and heavier than
lead. and the circle of it was twisted. if she ran a finger along one edge, it


 would go around twice, inside as well as out; it only had one edge. she moved
her finger along that edge twice, just to convince herself.
corianin nedeal, verin said, had that terangreal in her possession for
most of her life. you will keep it, now.
egwene almost dropped the ring. a terangreal? i am to keep a terangreal?
verin seemed not to notice her shock. according to her, it eases the
passage to telaranrhiod. she claimed it would work for those without
talent as well as for aes sedai, so long as you are touching it when you sleep.
there are dangers, of course. telaranrhiod is not like other dreams. what
happens there is real; you are actually there instead of just glimpsing it. she
pushed back the sleeve of her dress, revealing a faded scar the length of her
forearm. i tried it myself, once, some years ago. anaiyas healing did not
work as well as it should have. remember that. the aes sedai let her sleeve
cover the scar again.
i will be careful, verin sedai. real? my dreams are bad enough as they
are. i want no dreams that leave scars! ill put it in a sack and stick it in a
dark corner and leave it there. ill but she wanted to learn. she wanted to
be aes sedai, and no aes sedai had been a dreamer in nearly five hundred
years. ill be very careful. she slipped the ring into her pouch and tugged
the drawstrings tight, then picked up the papers verin had given her.
remember to keep it hidden, child. no novice, or even an accepted,
should have a thing like that in her possession. but it may prove useful to you.
keep it hidden.
yes, verin sedai. remembering verins scar, she almost wished another
aes sedai would come along and take it from her right then.
good, child. now, off with you. it grows late, and you must be up early to
help with breakfast. sleep well.
verin sat looking at the door for a time after it closed behind egwene. the
owl hooted softly behind her. pulling the red box to her, she opened the lid all
the way and frowned at what nearly filled the space.
page upon page, covered with a precise hand, the black ink barely faded
after nearly five hundred years. corianin nedeals notes, everything she had
learned in fifty years of studying that peculiar terangreal. a secretive
woman, corianin. she had kept by far the greater part of her knowledge from
everyone, trusting it only to these pages. only chance and a habit of


 rummaging through old papers in the library had led verin to them. as far as
she could discover, no aes sedai besides herself knew of the terangreal;
corianin had managed to erase its existence from the records.
once again she considered burning the manuscript, just as she had
considered giving it to egwene. but destroying knowledge, any knowledge,
was anathema to her. and for the other. . . . no. it is best by far to leave things
as they are. what will happen, will happen. she let the lid drop shut. now
where did i put that page?
frowning, she began to search the stacks of books and papers for the
leather folder. egwene was already out of her mind.


 c h a p t e r
2 2


the price of the ring


egwene had only gone a short distance from verins rooms when sheriam
met her. the mistress of novices wore a preoccupied frown.
if someone hadnt remembered verin speaking to you, i might not have
found you. the aes sedai sounded mildly irritated. come along, child. you
are holding everything up! what are those papers?
egwene clutched them a little tighter. she tried to make her voice both
meek and respectful. verin sedai thinks i should study them, aes sedai.
what would she do if sheriam asked to see them? what excuse could she
give for refusing, what explanation for pages telling all about thirteen women
of the black ajah and the terangreal they had stolen?
but sheriam seemed to have dismissed the papers from her mind as soon as
she asked. never mind that. you are wanted, and everyone is waiting. she
took egwenes arm and forced her to walk faster.
wanted, sheriam sedai? waiting for what?
sheriam shook her head with exasperation. did you forget that you are to
be raised to the accepted? when you come to my study tomorrow, you will
be wearing the ring, though i doubt it will soothe you very much.
egwene tried to stop short, but the aes sedai hurried her on, taking a
narrow set of stairs that curled down through the library walls. tonight?
already? but i am halfasleep, aes sedai, and dirty, and. . . . i thought i
would have days yet. to get ready. to prepare.
the hour waits on no woman, sheriam said. the wheel weaves as the
wheel wills, when the wheel wills. besides, how would you prepare? you


 already know the things you must. more than your friend nynaeve did. she
pushed egwene through a tiny door at the foot of the stairs and hurried her
across another hall to a ramp curving down and down.
i listened to the lectures, egwene protested, and i remember them, but
. . . cant i have a nights sleep first? the winding ramp seemed to have no
end.
the amyrlin seat decided there was no point in waiting. sheriam gave
egwene a sidelong smile. her exact words were, once you decide to gut a
fish, theres no use waiting till it rots. elayne has already been through the
arches by this time, and the amyrlin means you to go through tonight as well.
not that i can see the point of such a hurry, she added, half to herself, but
when the amyrlin commands, we obey.
egwene let herself be pulled down the ramp in silence, a knot forming in
her belly. nynaeve had been far from forthcoming about what had happened
when she was raised to the accepted. she would not speak of it at all, except
for a grimaced i hate aes sedai! egwene was trembling by the time the
ramp finally ended at a broad hallway, far below the tower in the rock of the
island.
the hall was plain and undecorated, the pale rock through which it had
been hewn smoothed but left otherwise untouched, and there was only one set
of dark wooden doors, as tall and wide as fortress gates and as plain, although
of smoothly finished and finely fitted planks, at the very end. those great
doors were so well balanced, though, that sheriam easily pushed one open,
and pulled egwene through after her, into a great, domed chamber.
not before time! elaida snapped. she stood to one side in her redfringed
shawl, beside a table on which sat three large silver chalices.
lamps on tall stands illumined the chamber, and what sat centered under
the dome. three rounded, silver arches, just tall enough to walk under, sitting
on a thick silver ring with their ends touching where they joined it. an aes
sedai sat crosslegged on the bare rock before each of the spots where arches
joined ring, all three wearing their shawls. alanna was the sister of the green
ajah, but she did not know the yellow sister, or the white.
surrounded by the glow of saidar embraced, the three aes sedai stared
fixedly at the arches, and within the silver structure an answering glow
flickered and grew. that structure was a terangreal, and whatever it had been
made for in the age of legends, now novices passed through it to become
accepted. inside it, egwene would have to face her fears. three times. the


 white light within the arches no longer flickered; it stayed within them as if
confined, but it filled the space, made it opaque.
be easy, elaida, sheriam said calmly. we will be done soon. she
turned to egwene. novices are given three chances at this. you may refuse
twice to enter, but at the third refusal, you are sent away from the tower
forever. that is how it is done usually, and you certainly have the right to
refuse, but i do not think the amyrlin seat will be pleased with you if you
do.
she should not be given this chance. there was iron in elaidas voice,
and her face was scarcely softer. i do not care what her potential is. she
should be put out of the tower. or failing that, set to scrubbing floors for the
next ten years.
sheriam gave the red sister a sharp look. you were not so adamant about
elayne. you demanded to be part of this, elaidaperhaps because of elayne
and you will do your part for this girl as well, as you are supposed to, or
you will leave and i will find another.
the two aes sedai stared at one another until egwene would not have been
surprised to see the glow of the one power surround them. finally elaida
gave a toss of her head and sniffed loudly.
if it must be done, let us do it. give the miserable girl her chance to refuse
and be done with it. it is late.
i wont refuse. egwenes voice quavered, but she steadied it and held her
head high. i want to go on.
good, sheriam said. good. now i will tell you two things no woman
hears until she stands where you do. once you begin, you must go on to the
end. refuse at any point, and you will be put out of the tower just as if you
had refused to begin for the third time. second. to seek, to strive, is to know
danger. she sounded as if she had said this many times. there was a light of
sympathy in her eyes, but her face was almost as stern as elaidas. the
sympathy frightened egwene more than the sternness. some women have
entered, and never come out. when the terangreal was allowed to grow
quiet, theywerenotthere. and they were never seen again. if you will
survive, you must be steadfast. falter, fail, and. . . .sheriams face drove the
unspoken words home; egwene shivered. this is your last chance. refuse
now, and it counts only as the first. you may still try twice more. if you accept
now, there is no turning back. it is no shame to refuse. i could not do it, my
first time. choose.


 they never came out? egwene swallowed hard. i want to be aes sedai. and
first i have to become accepted. i accept.
sheriam nodded. then ready yourself.
egwene blinked, then remembered. she had to enter unclothed. she bent to
set down the tied bundle of papers verin had given herand hesitated. if she
left them there, sheriam or elaida either one could go through them while she
was inside the terangreal. they could find that smaller terangreal in her
pouch. if she refused to go on, she could hide them away, perhaps leave them
with nynaeve. her breath caught. i cannot refuse now. ive already begun.
have you already chosen to refuse, child? sheriam asked, frowning.
knowing what that will mean, now?
no, aes sedai, egwene said quickly. hastily she undressed and folded
her clothes, then set them on top of the pouch and the papers. it would have to
do.
beside the terangreal, alanna suddenly spoke. there is some sort of
resonance. she never took her eyes from the arches. an echo, almost. i do
not know from where.
is there a problem? sheriam asked sharply. she sounded surprised, too.
i will not send a woman in there if there is any problem.
egwene looked yearningly at her piled clothes. please, yes, light, a
problem. something that will let me hide those papers without refusing to
enter.
no, alanna said. it is like having a biteme buzz round your head when
youre trying to think, but it does not interfere. i would not have mentioned it,
only it has never happened before that i ever heard. she shook her head. it
is gone now.
perhaps, elaida said dryly, others thought such a small thing was not
worth mentioning.
let us go on. sheriams tone would not put up with any more
distractions. come.
with a last glance at her clothes and the hidden papers, egwene followed
her toward the arches. the stone felt like ice under her bare feet.
whom do you bring with you, sister? elaida intoned.
continuing her measured pace, sheriam replied, one who comes as a
candidate for acceptance, sister. the three aes sedai around the terangreal


 did not move.
is she ready?
she is ready to leave behind what she was, and, passing through her fears,
gain acceptance.
does she know her fears?
she has never faced them, but now is willing.
then let her face what she fears. even in its formality, there was a note of
satisfaction in elaidas voice.
the first time, sheriam said, is for what was. the way back will come
but once. be steadfast.
egwene took a deep breath and stepped forward, through the arch and into
the glow. light swallowed her whole.
jaim dawtry dropped by. theres odd news down from baerlon with the
peddler.
egwene raised her head from the cradle she was rocking. rand was
standing in the doorway. for an instant her head spun. she looked from rand
my husbandto the child in the cradlemy daughterand back again, in
wonder.
the way back will come but once. be steadfast.
it was not her own thought, but a disembodied voice that could have been
inside her head or out, male or female, yet emotionless and unknowable.
somehow, it did not seem strange to her.
the moment of wonder passed, and the only thing to wonder about was
why she had thought anything seemed out of round. of course rand was her
husbandher handsome, loving husbandand joiya was her daughterthe
most beautiful, sweetest little girl in the two rivers. tam, rands father, was
out with the sheep, supposedly so rand could work on the barn but really so
he could have more time to play with joiya. this afternoon egwenes mother
and father would come out from the village. and probably nynaeve, to see if
motherhood was interfering with egwenes studies to replace nynaeve as
wisdom one day.
what kind of news? she asked. she took up rocking the cradle again, and
rand came over to grin down at the tiny child wrapped in swaddling clothes.


 egwene laughed softly to herself. he was so taken with his daughter that he
did not hear what people said to him half the time. rand? what kind of
news? rand?
what? his grin faded. strange news. war. theres some big war, taking
up most of the world, so jaim claims. that was strange news; word of wars
seldom reached the two rivers till the wars were long done. he says
everybody is fighting some folk called the shawkin, or the sanchan, or
something like that. i never heard of them.
egwene knewshe thought she knewwhatever it was, was gone.
are you all right? he asked. its nothing to upset us here, my heart. wars
never touch the two rivers. we are too far from everywhere for anyone to
care.
im not upset. did jaim say anything else?
nothing you can believe. he sounded like a coplin. he said the peddler
told him these people use aes sedai in battle, but then he claimed they offer a
thousand gold marks to anyone who turns an aes sedai over to them. and
they kill anybody who hides one. it makes no sense. well, its nothing to
trouble us. it is all a long way from here.
aes sedai. egwene touched her head. the way back comes but once. be
steadfast.
she noticed rand had a hand to his own head. the headaches? she asked.
he nodded, his eyes suddenly tight. that powder nynaeve gave me
doesnt seem to be working the last few days.
she hesitated. these headaches of his worried her. they grew worse every
time they came, now. and worst of all was something she had not noticed at
first, something she almost wished she never had noticed. when rands head
hurt, strange things happened soon after. lightning out of a clear sky,
smashing to bits that huge oak stump he had been working two days to root
out where he and tam were clearing new field. storms that nynaeve did not
hear coming when she listened to the wind. wildfires in the forest. and the
deeper his pain grew, the worse what followed. no one else had connected
these things to rand, not even nynaeve, and egwene was grateful for that.
she did not want to think about what it might mean.
that is plain stupid foolish, she told herself. i must know if i am going to
help him. because she had a secret of her own, one that frightened her even as
she tried to puzzle out what it meant. nynaeve was teaching her the herbs,


 teaching egwene to follow her as wisdom, one day. nynaeves cures often
worked in near miraculous fashion, wounds healed with barely a scar, sick
folk brought back from the edge of the grave. but three times now, egwene
had cured someone nynaeve had given up for dead. three times she had sat
to hold a hand through the last hour, and seen the person get up from a
deathbed. nynaeve had questioned her closely on what she had done, what
herbs she had used, in what blending. thus far, she had not found the courage
to admit that she had done nothing. i must have done something. once might
be chance, but three times. . . . i have to figure it out. i have to learn. that set
off a buzz in her head, as though the words were echoing inside her skull. if i
could do something for them, i can help my husband.
let me try, rand, she said. and as she stood, through the open door, she
saw a silver arch standing in front of the house, an arch filled with white light.
the way back will come but once. be steadfast. she took two steps toward the
door before she could stop herself.
she halted, looked back at joiya gurgling in her cradle, at rand still
pressing hand to his head and looking at her as if wondering where she was
going. no, she said. no, this is what i want. this is what i want! why
cant i have this, too? she did not understand her own words. of course, this
was what she wanted, and she had it.
what is it you want, egwene? rand asked. if its anything i can get, you
know i will. if i cant get it, ill make it.
the way back will come but once. be steadfast.
she took another step, into the doorway. the silver arch beckoned her.
something waited on the other side. something she wanted more than
anything else in the world. something she had to do.
egwene, i
there was a thump behind her. she looked over her shoulder to see rand
on his knees, bowed and head cradled in his hands. the pain had never hit
him so hard. what will come after this?
ah, light! he panted. light! hurts! light, it hurts worse than ever!
egwene?
be steadfast.
it was waiting. something she had to do. had to. she took a step. it was
hard, harder than anything she had ever done in her life. outside, toward the
arch. behind her, joiya was laughing.


 egwene? egwene, i cant he cut off with a loud groan.
steadfast.
she stiffened her back and kept walking, but she could not keep the tears
from rolling down her cheeks. rands groans built to a scream, drowning
joiyas laughter. from the corner of her eye, egwene saw tam coming,
running as hard as he could.
he cant help, she thought, and tears became wracking sobs. there is
nothing he can do. but i could. i could.
she stepped into the light, and was consumed.
trembling and sobbing, egwene stepped out of the arch, the same by which
she had entered, memory cascading back with sheriams face confronting her.
cold clear water washed away her tears as elaida slowly emptied a silver
chalice over her head. her weeping went on; she did not think it would ever
end.
you are washed clean, elaida pronounced, of what sin you may have
done, and of those done against you. you are washed clean of what crime you
may have committed, and of those committed against you. you come to us
washed clean and pure, in heart and soul.
light, egwene thought as the water ran down her body, let it be so. can
water wash away what i did? her name was joiya, she told sheriam
between sobs. joiya. nothing can be worth what i just . . . what i. . . .
there is a price to become aes sedai, sheriam replied, but the sympathy
was back in her eyes, stronger than before. there is always a price.
was it real? did i dream it? weeping swallowed what she wanted to say.
did i leave him to die? did i leave my baby?
sheriam put an arm around her shoulders, began guiding her around the
circle of arches. every woman i have ever watched come out of there has
asked that question. the answer is, no one knows. it has been speculated that
perhaps some of those who do not come back chose to stay because they
found a happier place, and lived out their lives there. her voice hardened. if
it is real, and they stayed from choice, then i hope the lives they live are far
from happy. i have no sympathy for any who run from their responsibilities.
the edge on her tone softened slightly. myself, i believe it is not real. but
the danger is. remember that. she stopped in front of the next glowfilled


 arch. are you ready?
shifting her feet, egwene nodded, and sheriam took her arm away.
the second time is for what is. the way back will come but once. be
steadfast.
egwene trembled. whatever happens, it cannot be worse than the last. it
cannot be. she stepped into the glow.
she stared down at her dress, blue silk sewn with pearls, all dusty and torn.
her head came up, and she took in the ruins of a great palace around her. the
royal palace of andor, in caemlyn. she knew that, and wanted to scream.
the way back will come but once. be steadfast.
the world was not the way she wanted it, no way that she could think of
without wanting to cry, but all her tears had been cried away long ago, and the
world was as it was. ruin was what she expected to see.
careless of making more rips in her dress but as careful of sound as a
mouse, she climbed one of the piles of rubble and peered into the curving
streets of the inner city. as far as she could see in every direction lay ruin and
desolation, buildings that looked as if they had been torn apart by madmen,
thick plumes of smoke rising from the fires still burning. there were people
in the streets, bands of armed men prowling, searching. and trollocs. the
men shied away from the trollocs, and the trollocs snarled at them and
laughed, harsh guttural laughter. but they knew each other, worked together.
a myrddraal came striding down the street, its black cloak swaying gently
with its steps even when the wind gusted to drive dust and rubbish past it.
men and trollocs alike cowered under its eyeless stare. hunt! its voice
sounded like something long dead crumbling. do not stand there shivering!
find him!
egwene slipped back down the pile of jumbled stones as silently as she
could.
the way back will come but once. be steadfast.
she stopped, afraid the whisper had come from shadowspawn. in some
way, though, she was sure it had not. glancing back over her shoulder, half
fearful of seeing the myrddraal standing where she had just been, she hurried
onward and into the ruined palace, climbing over fallen timbers, squeezing
between heavy blocks of collapsed masonry as she made her way. once she


 stepped on a womans arm, sticking out from under a mound of plaster and
bricks that had been an interior wall and perhaps part of the floor above. she
noticed the arm as little as she noticed the great serpent ring on one finger.
she had trained herself not to see the dead buried in the refuse heap trollocs
and darkfriends had made of caemlyn. she could do nothing for the dead.
forcing her way through a narrow gap where part of the ceiling had fallen,
she found herself in a room half buried under what had stood above it. rand
lay with a heavy beam pinning him across the waist, his legs hidden beneath
the stone blocks that filled half the room. dust and sweat coated his face. he
opened his eyes when she came near him.
you came back. he forced the words out in a hoarse rasp. i was afraid
no matter. you have to help me.
she sank wearily to the floor. i could lift that beam easily with air, but as
soon as it moves, everything else will come down on top of you. on top of
both of us. i cannot manage all of it, rand.
his laugh was bitter and painful, and cut off almost as soon as it began.
fresh sweat glistened on his face, and he spoke with an effort. i could shift
the beam myself. you know that. i could shift that and the stones above, all of
them. but i have to let go of myself to do it, and i cant trust that. i cannot
trust he stopped, wheezing for breath.
i do not understand, she said slowly. let go of yourself? what cant you
trust? the way back will come but once. be steadfast. she rubbed her hands
roughly over her ears.
the madness, egwene. i amactuallyholding itat bay. his gasping
laugh made her skin prickle. but it takes everything i have just to do that. if i
let go, even a little, even for an instant, the madness will have me. i wont
care what i do then. you have to help me.
how, rand! ive tried everything i know. tell me how, and i will do it.
his hand flopped out, fell just short of a dagger lying in the dust barebladed. the dagger, he whispered. his hand made a painful journey back to
his chest. here. in the heart. kill me.
she stared at him, at the dagger, as if they were both poisonous serpents.
no! rand, i will not. i cannot! how could you ask such a thing?
slowly his hand crept back toward the dagger. his fingers came short
again. he strained, moaning, brushed it with a fingertip. before he could try
again, she kicked it away from him. he collapsed with a sob.


 tell me why, she demanded. why would you ask me toto murder
you? i will heal you, i will do anything to get you out of there, but i cannot
kill you. why?
they can turn me, egwene. his breathing was so tortured, she wished
she could weep. if they take methe myrddraalthe dreadlordsthey can
turn me to the shadow. if madness has me, i cannot fight them. i wont know
what they are doing till it is too late. if there is even a spark of life left when
they find me, they can still do it. please, egwene. for the love of the light.
kill me.
ii cant, rand. light help me, i cannot!
the way back will come but once. be steadfast.
she looked over her shoulder, and a silver arch filled with white light took
up most of the open space among the rubble.
egwene, help me.
be steadfast.
she stood and took a step toward the arch. it was right there in front of her.
one more step, and. . . .
please, egwene. help me. i cant reach it. for the love of the light,
egwene, help me!
i cannot kill you, she whispered.
i cant. forgive me. she stepped forward.
help me, egwene!
light burned her to ash.
staggering, she stepped out of the arch, neither noticing her nakedness nor
caring. a shudder ran through her, and she covered her mouth with both
hands. i couldnt, rand, she whispered. i couldnt. please forgive me.
light help him. please, light help rand.
cold water poured over her head.
you are washed clean of false pride, elaida intoned. you are washed
clean of false ambition. you come to us washed clean, in heart and soul.
as the red sister turned away, sheriam gently took egwenes shoulders
and guided her toward the last arch. one more, child. one more, and it is


 done.
he said they could turn him to the shadow, egwene mumbled. he said
the myrddraal and the dreadlords could force him.
sheriam missed a step, and looked around quickly. elaida was almost back
to the table. the aes sedai surrounding the terangreal stared at it, seeming
lost to anything else. an unpleasant thing to talk of, child, sheriam said
finally, and softly. come. one more.
can they? egwene insisted.
custom, sheriam said, is not to speak of what happens within the
terangreal. a womans fears are her own.
can they?
sheriam sighed, glanced at the other aes sedai again, then dropped her
voice to a whisper and spoke swiftly. this is something known only to a few,
child, even in the tower. you should not learn it now, if ever, but i will tell
you. there isa weakness in being able to channel. that we learn to open
ourselves to the true source means that we can beopened to other things.
egwene shuddered. calm yourself, child. it is not so easily done. it is a thing
not done, so far as i knowlight send it has not been done!since the
trolloc wars. it took thirteen dreadlordsdarkfriends who could channel
weaving the flows through thirteen myrddraal. you see? not easily done.
there are no dreadlords today. this is a secret of the tower, child. if others
knew, we could never convince them they were safe. only one who can
channel can be turned in this way. the weakness of our strength. everyone
else is as safe as a fortress; only their own deeds and will can turn them to the
shadow.
thirteen, egwene said in a tiny voice. the same number who left the
tower. liandrin, and twelve more.
sheriams face hardened. that is nothing for you to dwell on. you will
forget it. her voice climbed to a normal volume. the third time is for what
will be. the way back will come but once. be steadfast.
egwene stared at the glowing arch, stared at some far distance beyond it.
liandrin and twelve others. thirteen darkfriends who can channel. light
help us all. she stepped into the light. it filled her. it shone through her. it
burned her to the bone, seared her to the soul. she flashed incandescent in the
light. light help me! there was nothing but the light. and the pain.


 egwene stared into the standing mirror, and was not sure whether she was
more surprised by the ageless smoothness of her face or the striped stole that
hung around her neck. the stole of the amyrlin seat.
the way back will come but once. be steadfast.
thirteen.
she swayed, caught at the mirror and almost toppled it and herself to the
bluetiled floor of her dressing chamber. something is wrong, she thought.
the wrongness had nothing to do with her sudden dizziness, or at least that
was not what felt wrong. it was something else. but she had no idea what.
there was an aes sedai at her elbow, a woman with sheriams high
cheekbones but dark hair and concerned brown eyes, and the handwide stole
of the keeper on her shoulders. not sheriam, though. egwene had never seen
her before; she was sure she knew her as well as she knew herself. haltingly,
she put a name to the woman. beldeine.
are you ill, mother?
her stole is green. that means she was raised from the green ajah. the
keeper always comes from the same ajah as the amyrlin she serves. which
means if im the amyrlinif?then i was green ajah, too. that thought
shook her. not that she had been green ajah, but that she had to reason it out.
light, something is wrong with me.
the way back will come bu. . . . the voice in her head trailed away to finish
in a buzz.
thirteen darkfriends.
i am well, beldeine, egwene said. the name felt strange on her tongue; it
felt as if she had been saying it for years. we mustnt keep them waiting.
keep who waiting? she did not know, except that she felt infinitely sad about
ending that wait, endlessly reluctant.
they will be growing impatient, mother. there was a hesitation in
beldeines voice, as if she felt the same reluctance as egwene, but for a
different reason. unless egwene missed her guess, behind that outer calm,
beldeine was terrified.
in that case, we had best be about it.
beldeine nodded, then took a deep breath before crossing the carpet to
where her staff of office, topped with the snowdrop white flame of tar
valon, stood propped beside the door. i suppose we must, mother. she took


 up the staff and opened the door for egwene, then hurried ahead so that they
made a procession of two, keeper of the chronicles leading the amyrlin seat.
egwene noticed little of the corridors they took. all her attention was
directed inward. what is the matter with me? why cant i remember? why is
so much of what i . . . almost remember wrong? she touched the sevenstriped
stole on her shoulders. why am i half sure im still a novice?
the way back will come but onthis time it ended abruptly.
thirteen of the black ajah.
she stumbled at that. it was a frightening thought, but it chilled her to the
marrow beyond fear. it feltpersonal. she wanted to scream, to run and hide.
she felt as if they were after her. nonsense. the black ajah has been
destroyed. that seemed an odd thought, too. part of her remembered
something called the great purge. part of her was sure no such thing had
happened.
eyes fixed ahead, beldeine had not noticed her stumble. egwene had to
lengthen her stride to catch up. this woman is scared to her toenails. what in
the light is she taking me to?
beldeine stopped before tall, paired doors, their dark wood each inlaid with
a large silver flame of tar valon. she wiped her hands on her dress, as if they
were suddenly sweaty, before opening one door and leading egwene up a
straight ramp of the same silverstreaked white stone that made tar valons
walls. even here it seemed to shine.
the ramp let into a large, circular room under a domed ceiling at least
thirty paces high. a raised platform ran around the outer edge of the room,
fronted by steps except where this ramp and two others came out, spaced
equally around the circle. the flame of tar valon lay centered in the floor,
surrounded by widening spirals of color, the colors of the seven ajahs. at the
opposite side of the room from where the ramp entered, a highbacked chair
stood, heavy and ornately carved in vines and leaves, painted in the colors of
all the ajahs.
beldeine rapped her staff sharply on the floor. there was a tremor in her
voice. she comes. the watcher of the seals. the flame of tar valon. the
amyrlin seat. she comes.
with a rustle of skirts, shawled women on the platform got up from their
chairs. twentyone chairs in groupings of three, each triad painted and
cushioned in the same color as the fringe on the shawls of the women who


 stood before them.
the hall of the tower, egwene thought as she crossed the floor to her chair.
the amyrlin seats chair. thats all it is. the hall of the tower, and the
sitters for the ajahs. ive been here thousands of times. but she could not
remember one of them. what am i doing in the hall of the tower? light,
theyll skin me alive when they see. . . . she was not sure what it was they
would see, only that she prayed they did not.
the way back will come but
the way back will
the way
the black ajah waits. that, at least, was whole. it came from everywhere.
why did no one else seem to hear it?
settling in the chair of the amyrlin seatthe chair that was also the
amyrlin seatshe realized she had no idea what to do next. the other aes
sedai had seated themselves when she did, all but beldeine, who stood beside
her with the staff, swallowing nervously. they all seemed to be waiting on
her.
begin, she said finally.
it seemed to be enough. one of the red sitters stood. egwene was shocked
to recognize elaida. at the same time she knew that elaida was foremost of
the sitters for the red, and her own bitterest enemy. the look on elaidas face
as she stared across the chamber made egwene shiver inside. it was stern and
coldand triumphant. it promised things best not thought of.
bring him in, elaida said loudly.
from one of the rampsnot the one egwene had entered bycame the
crunch of boots on stone. people appeared. a dozen aes sedai surrounding
three men, two of them burly guards with the white teardrops of the flame of
tar valon on their chests, tugging the chains in which the third stumbled as if
dazed.
egwene jerked forward in her chair. the chained man was rand. eyes halfclosed, head sagging, he seemed nearly asleep, moving only as the chains
directed.
this man, elaida proclaimed, has named himself the dragon reborn.
there was a buzz of distaste, not as if the listeners were surprised, but as
though it were not something they wanted to hear. this man has channeled


 the one power. the buzz was louder now, disgusted and tinged with fear.
there is only one penalty for this, known and recognized in every nation, but
pronounced only here, in tar valon, in the hall of the tower. i call on the
amyrlin seat to pronounce the sentence of gentling on this man.
elaidas eyes glittered at egwene. rand. what do i do? light, what do i
do?
why do you hesitate? elaida demanded. the sentence has been set
down for three thousand years. why do you hesitate, egwene alvere?
one of the green sitters was on her feet, anger bright through her calm.
shame, elaida! show respect for the amyrlin seat! show respect for the
mother!
respect, elaida answered coldly, can be lost as well as won. well,
egwene? can it be you show your weakness, your unfitness for your office, at
last? can it be you will not pronounce sentence on this man?
rand tried to lift his head and failed.
egwene struggled to her feet, head spinning, trying to remember she was
the amyrlin seat with the power to command all these women, screaming
that she was a novice, that she did not belong here, that something was
dreadfully wrong. no, she said shakily. no, i cannot! i will not
she betrays herself! elaidas shout drowned out egwenes attempt to
speak. she condemns herself out of her own mouth! take her!
as egwene opened her mouth, beldeine moved beside her. then the
keepers staff struck her head.
blackness.
first there was pain in her head. there was something hard under her back,
and cold. next came the voices. murmurs.
is she still unconscious? it was a rasp, a file on bone.
do not worry, a woman said from far, far away. she sounded uneasy,
afraid, and trying not to show either. she will be dealt with before she knows
what is happening to her. then she is ours, to do with as we will. perhaps we
will give her to you for sport.
after you make your own use of her.
of course.
the distant voices moved further away.


 her hand brushed against her leg, touched bare, pebbly flesh. she opened
her eyes a crack. she was naked, bruised, lying on a rough wooden table, in
what seemed to be a disused storeroom. splinters stuck her back. there was a
metallic taste of blood in her mouth.
a cluster of aes sedai stood to one side of the room, talking among
themselves, voices low yet urgent. the pain in her head made thinking
difficult, but it seemed important to count them. thirteen.
another group, blackcloaked and hooded men, joined the aes sedai, who
seemed caught between cowering and trying to dominate with their presence.
one of the men turned his head to look toward the table. the dead white face
within the hood had no eyes.
egwene had no need to count the myrddraal. she knew. thirteen
myrddraal, and thirteen aes sedai. without another thought, she screamed in
pure terror. yet even in the midst of fear that tried to split her bones, she
reached out for the true source, clawed desperately for saidar.
shes awake!
she cannot be! not yet!
shield her! quickly! quickly! cut her off from the source!
its too late! she is too strong!
seize her! hurry!
hands reached for her arms and legs. pasty pale hands like slugs under
rocks, ordered by minds behind pale, eyeless faces. if those hands touched her
flesh, she knew she would go mad. the power filled her.
flames burst from myrddraal skin, ripping through black cloth as if they
were solid daggers of fire. shrieking halfmen crisped and burned like oiled
paper. fistsized chunks of stone tore themselves free of the walls and
whizzed across the room, producing shrieks and grunts as they thudded into
flesh. the air stirred, shifted, howled into a whirlwind.
slowly, painfully, egwene pushed herself off the table. the wind whipped
her hair and made her stagger, but she continued to drive it as she stumbled
toward the door. an aes sedai loomed in front of her, a woman bruised and
bleeding, surrounded by the glow of the power. a woman with death in her
dark eyes.
egwenes mind put a name to the face. gyldan. elaidas closest confidante,
always whispering together in corners, closeting themselves in the night.


 egwenes mouth tightened. disdaining stones and wind, she balled up her fist
and punched gyldan between the eyes as hard as she could. the red sister
the black sistercrumpled as if her bones had melted.
rubbing her knuckles, egwene staggered out into the hall. thank you,
perrin, she thought, for showing me how to do that. but you didnt tell me
how much it hurts when you do.
shoving the door shut against the wind, she channeled. stones around the
doorway shivered, cracked, settled against the wood. it would not hold them
for long, but anything that slowed pursuit for even a minute was worth doing.
minutes might mean life. gathering her strength, she forced herself to break
into a run. it wobbled, but at least it was a run.
she must find some clothes, she decided. a woman clothed had more
authority than the same woman naked, and she was going to need every bit of
authority. they would look for her first in her rooms, but she had a spare
dress and shoes in her studyand another stoleand that lay not far off.
it was unnerving, trotting through empty hallways. the white tower no
longer held the numbers it once had, but there was usually someone about.
the loudest sound was the slap of her bare soles on the tiles.
she hurried through the antechamber of her study to the inner room, and at
last she found someone. beldeine was sitting on the floor, head in her hands,
weeping.
egwene stopped warily, as beldeine raised reddened eyes to meet hers. no
glow of saidar surrounded the keeper, but egwene was still cautious. and
confident. she could not see her own glow, of course, but the powerthe
powersurging through her was enough. especially when added to her
secret.
beldeine scrubbed a hand across tearstained cheeks. i had to. you must
understand. i had to. they. . . . they. . . . she took a deep, shuddering breath;
it all came out in a rush. three nights ago they took me while i slept and
stilled me. her voice rose to a near shriek. they stilled me! i cannot
channel any longer!
light, egwene breathed. the rush of saidar cushioned her against the
shock. the light help and comfort you, my daughter. why didnt you tell
me? i would have. . . . she let it trail away, knowing there was nothing she
could do.
what would you have done? what? nothing! theres nothing you can do.


 but they said they could give it back to me, with the power of . . . the power
of the dark one. her eyes squeezed shut, leaking tears. they hurt me,
mother, and they made me. . . . oh, light, they hurt me! elaida told me they
would make me whole again, make me able to channel again, if i obeyed.
thats why i. . . . i had to!
so elaida is black ajah, egwene said grimly. a narrow wardrobe stood
against the wall, and in it hung a green silk dress, kept for when she had no
time to return to her rooms. a striped stole hung beside the dress. she began
to dress herself, quickly. what have they done with rand? where have they
taken him? answer me, beldeine! where is rand althor?
beldeine huddled, lips trembling, eyes turned bleakly inward, but finally
she roused herself enough to say, the traitors court, mother. they took
him to the traitors court.
shivers assaulted egwene. shivers of fear. shivers of rage. elaida had not
waited, not even an hour. the traitors court was used for only three
purposes: executions, the stilling of an aes sedai, or the gentling of a man
who could channel. but all of the three took an order from the amyrlin seat.
so who wears the stole out there? elaida, she was sure. but how could she
make them accept her so quickly, with me not tried, not sentenced? there
cannot be another amyrlin until ive been stripped of stole and staff. and
theyll not find that easy to do. light! rand! she started for the door.
what can you do, mother? beldeine cried. what can you do? it was
not clear whether she meant for rand or for herself.
more than anyone suspects, egwene said. i never held the oath rod,
beldeine. beldeines gasp followed her from the room.
egwenes memory still played hideandseek with her. she knew no woman
could achieve the shawl and the ring without pledging the three oaths with
the oath rod firmly in hand, the terangreal sealing her to keep those oaths
as if they had been engraved on her bones at birth. no woman became aes
sedai without being bound to them. yet she knew that somehow, in some
fashion she could not begin to dredge up, she had done just that.
her shoes clicked swiftly as she ran. at least she knew now why the halls
were empty. every aes sedai, except perhaps those she had left in the
storeroom, every accepted, every novice, even all the servants, would be
gathered in the traitors court, according to custom, to watch the will of tar
valon made fact.
and the warders would be ringing the courtyard against the possibility that


 someone might try to free the man to be gentled. the remnants of guaire
amalasans armies had attempted it, at the end of what some called the war
of the second dragon, just before artur hawkwings rise had given tar valon
other things to worry it, and so had raolin darksbanes followers, long years
earlier. whether rand had any followers or not, she could not remember, but
warders remembered such things, and guarded against them.
if elaida, or another, truly did wear the stole of the amyrlin, the warders
might well not admit her to the traitors court. she knew she could force a
way in. it would need to be done quickly; there was no point if rand was
gentled while she was still wrapping warders in air. even warders would
break if she loosed the lightnings on them, and balefire, and broke the ground
under their feet. balefire? she wondered. but it would also do no good if she
broke tar valons power to save rand. she had to save both.
well short of the ways that led to the traitors court, she turned aside and
climbed, up stairs and ramps that grew narrower and tighter the higher she
went, until she thrust open a trapdoor and climbed out onto a sloping tower
top, a roof of nearly white tiles. from there, she could see across other roofs,
past other towers, into the broad open well of the traitors court.
the court was crowded except for a cleared space in the middle. people
filled the windows overlooking it, crowded the balconies and even the
rooftops, but she could make out the lone man, small at that distance, swaying
in his chains in the center of the cleared space. rand. twelve aes sedai
surrounded him, and anotherwho egwene knew had to be wearing a sevenstriped stole, even though she could not distinguish itstood before rand.
elaida. the words she must be saying crept into egwenes head.
this man, abandoned of the light, has touched saidin, the male half of the
true source. thus do we hold him. most abominably has this man channeled
the one power, knowing that saidin is tainted by the dark one, tainted for
mens pride, tainted for mens sin. thus do we chain him.
forcefully, egwene pushed the rest of it out of her thoughts. thirteen aes
sedai. twelve sisters and the amyrlin, the traditional number for gentling.
the same number as for. . . . she rid herself of that, too. she had no time for
anything but what she was there to do. if she could only manage to reason out
how.
at that distance, she thought she could manage to lift him with air. pick
him right out of the circle of aes sedai and float him straight to her. maybe.
even if she could find the strength, even if she did not drop him to his death


 halfway, it would be a slow process, with him a helpless target for archers,
and the glow of saidar pointing out her own position for any aes sedai who
looked. any myrddraal, for that matter.
light, she muttered, theres no other way short of starting a war inside
the white tower. and i may do that anyway. she gathered the power,
separated skeins, directed flows.
the way back will come but once. be steadfast.
it had been so long since she last heard those words that she gave a start,
slipped on the smooth tiles, barely caught herself short of the edge. the
ground lay a hundred paces down. she looked over her shoulder.
there on the tower top, tilted to sit flat against the sloping tiles, was a silver
arch filled with a glowing light. the arch flickered and wavered; streaks of
angry red and yellow darted through the white light.
the way back will come but once. be steadfast.
the archway thinned to transparency, grew solid again.
frantic, egwene gazed toward the traitors court. there had to be time.
there had to be. all she needed was a few minutes, perhaps ten, and luck.
voices bored into her head, not the disembodied, unknowable voice that
warned her to be steadfast, but womens voices she almost believed she knew.
cant hold much longer. if she does not come out now
hold! hold, burn you, or ill gut you all like sturgeons!
going wild, mother! we cant
the voices faded to a drone, the drone to silence, but the unknowable spoke
again.
the way back will come but once. be steadfast.
there is a price to be aes sedai.
the black ajah waits.
with a scream of rage, of loss, egwene threw herself at the arch as it
shimmered like a heat haze. she almost wished she would miss and plunge to
her death.
light plucked her apart fiber by fiber, sliced the fibers to hairs, split the
hairs to wisps of nothing. all drifted apart on the light. forever.


  c h a p t e r
2 3


sealed


light pulled her apart fiber by fiber, sliced the fibers to hairs that drifted
apart, burning. drifting and burning, forever. forever.
egwene stepped out of the silver arch cold and stiff with anger. she wanted
the iciness of anger to counter the searing of memory. her body remembered
burning, but other memories scored and scorched more deeply. anger cold as
death.
is that all there is for me? she demanded. to abandon him again and
again. to betray him, fail him, again and again? is that what there is for me?
suddenly she realized that all was not as it should be. the amyrlin was
there now, as egwene had been taught she would be, and a shawled sister
from each ajah, but they all stared at her worriedly. two aes sedai now sat at
each place around the terangreal, sweat running down their faces. the
terangreal hummed, almost vibrated, and violent streaks of color tore the
white light inside the arches.
the glow of saidar briefly enveloped sheriam as she put a hand on
egwenes head, sending a new chill through her. she is well. the mistress
of novices sounded relieved. she is unharmed. as if she had not expected
it.
tension seemed to go out of the other aes sedai facing egwene. elaida let
out a long breath, then hurried away for the last chalice. only the aes sedai
around the terangreal did not relax. the hum had lessened, and the light
began the flickering that signaled the terangreal was settling toward


 quiescence, but those aes sedai looked as if they were fighting it every inch
of the way.
what . . . ? what happened? egwene asked.
be silent, sheriam said, but gently. for now, be silent. you are well
that is the main thingand we must complete the ceremony. elaida came,
close to running, and handed the final silver chalice to the amyrlin.
egwene hesitated only a moment before kneeling. what happened?
the amyrlin emptied the chalice slowly over egwenes head. you are
washed clean of egwene alvere from emonds field. you are washed clean
of all ties that bind you to the world. you come to us washed clean, in heart
and soul. you are egwene alvere, accepted of the white tower. the last
drop splashed onto egwenes hair. you are sealed to us, now.
the last words seemed to have a special meaning, just between egwene
and the amyrlin. the amyrlin thrust the chalice at one of the other aes sedai
and produced a gold ring in the shape of a serpent biting its own tail. despite
herself, egwene trembled as she raised her left hand, trembled again as the
amyrlin slipped the great serpent ring onto the third finger. when she
became aes sedai, she could wear the ring on the finger she chose, or not at
all if it was necessary to hide who she was, but the accepted wore it there.
unsmiling, the amyrlin pulled her to her feet. welcome, daughter, she
said, kissing her cheek. egwene was surprised to feel a thrill. not child, but
daughter. always before she had been child. the amyrlin kissed her other
cheek. welcome.
stepping back, the amyrlin regarded her critically, but spoke to sheriam.
get her dry and into some clothes, then be certain she is well. certain, you
understand.
i am certain, mother. sheriam sounded surprised. you saw me delve
her.
the amyrlin grunted, and her eyes shifted to the terangreal. i mean to
know what went wrong tonight. she strode away in the direction of her
glare, skirts swaying purposefully. most of the other aes sedai joined her
around the terangreal, now only a silver structure of arches on a ring.
the mother is worried about you, sheriam said as she drew egwene to
one side, to where there was a thick towel for her hair, and another for the rest
of her.


 how much reason did she have? egwene asked. the amyrlin wants
nothing to happen to her hound till the deer is pulled down.
sheriam did not answer. she merely frowned slightly, then waited until
egwene was dry before handing her a white dress banded at the bottom with
seven rings.
she slipped into that dress with a flash of disappointment. she was one of
the accepted, with the ring on her finger and the bands on her dress. why
dont i feel any different?
elaida came over, her arms filled with egwenes novice dress and shoes,
her belt and pouch. and the papers verin had given her. in elaidas hands.
egwene made herself wait for the aes sedai to hand the bundle to her
rather than snatch them away. thank you, aes sedai. she tried to eye the
papers surreptitiously; she could not tell if they had been disturbed. the string
was still tied. how would i know if shes read all of them? squeezing her
pouch under cover of the novice dress, she felt the peculiar ring, the
terangreal, inside. at least thats still here. light, she could have taken that,
and i dont know that i would have minded. yes, i would. i think i would.
elaidas face was as cold as her voice. i did not want you to be brought
forward tonight. not because i feared what happened; no one could foresee
that. but because of what you are. a wilder. egwene tried to protest, but
elaida kept on, as implacable as a mountain glacier. oh, i know you learned
to channel under aes sedai teaching, but you are still a wilder. a wilder in
spirit, a wilder in ways. you have vast potential, else you would never have
survived in there tonight, but potential changes nothing. i do not believe you
will ever be part of the white tower, not in the way the rest of us are, no
matter on which finger you wear your ring. it would have been better for you
had you settled for learning enough to stay alive, and gone back to your
sleepy village. far better. turning on her heel, she stalked away, out of the
chamber.
if she isnt black ajah, egwene thought sourly, shes the next thing to it.
aloud, she muttered to sheriam, you could have said something. you could
have helped me.
i would have helped a novice, child, sheriam replied calmly, and egwene
winced. she was back to child again. i try to protect novices where they
need it, since they cannot protect themselves. you are accepted, now. it is
time for you to learn to protect yourself.
egwene studied sheriams eyes, wondering if she had imagined an


 emphasis on that last sentence. sheriam had had as much opportunity as
elaida to read the list of names, to decide that egwene was mixed in with the
black ajah. light, youre becoming suspicious of everybody. better that than
dead, or captured by thirteen of them and. . . . hastily, she stopped that line of
thought; she did not want it in her head. sheriam, what did happen tonight?
she asked. and dont put me off. sheriams eyebrows rose almost to her
scalp, it seemed, and she hastily amended her question. sheriam sedai, i
mean. forgive me, sheriam sedai.
remember you arent aes sedai yet, child. despite the steel in her voice,
a smile touched sheriams lips, yet it vanished as she went on. i do not know
what happened. except that i very much fear you almost died.
who knows what happens to those who do not come out of a
terangreal? alanna said as she joined them. the green sister was known
for her temper and her sense of humor, and some said she could flash from
one to the other and back again before you could blink, but the look she gave
egwene was almost diffident. child, i should have stopped this when i had
the chance, when i first noticed thatreverberation. it came back. that is
what happened. it came back a thousandfold. ten thousand. the terangreal
almost seemed to be trying to shut off the flow from saidaror melt itself
through the floor. you have my apologies, though words are not enough. not
for what almost happened to you. i say this, and by the first oath you know it
is true. to show my feelings, i will ask the mother to let me share your time
in the kitchens. and, yes, your visit to sheriam, too. had i done as i should,
you would not have been in danger of your life, and i will atone for it.
sheriams laugh was scandalized. she will never allow that, alanna. a
sister in the kitchens, much less. . . . it is unheard of. its impossible! you did
what you believed right. there is no fault to you.
it was not your fault, alanna sedai, egwene said. why is alanna doing
this? unless maybe to convince me she didnt have anything to do with
whatever went wrong. and maybe so she can keep an eye on me all the time.
it was that image, a proud aes sedai up to her elbows in greasy pots three
times a day just to watch someone, that convinced her she was letting her
imagination run away with her. but it was also unthinkable that alanna
should do as she said she would. in any case, the green sister certainly had
had no chance to see the list of names while tending the terangreal. but if
nynaeve is right, she wouldnt need to see those names to want to kill me if
she is black ajah. stop that! really, it wasnt.
had i done as i should, alanna maintained, it would never have


 happened. the only time i have ever seen anything like it was once years ago
when we tried to use a terangreal in the same room with another that may
have been in some way related to it. it is extremely rare to find two such as
that. the pair of them melted, and every sister within a hundred paces had
such a headache for a week that she couldnt channel a spark. whats the
matter, child?
egwenes hand had tightened around her pouch till the twisted stone ring
impressed itself on her palm through the thick cloth. was it warm? light, i did
it myself. nothing, alanna sedai. aes sedai, you did nothing wrong. you
have no reason to share my punishments. none at all. none!
a bit vehement, sheriam observed, but true. alanna only shook her
head.
aes sedai, egwene said slowly, what does it mean to be green ajah?
sheriams eyes opened wider with amusement, and alanna grinned openly.
just with the ring on your finger, the green sister said, and already
trying to decide which ajah to choose? first, you must love men. i dont
mean be in love with them, but love them. not like a blue, who merely likes
men, so long as they share her causes and do not get in her way. and certainly
not like a red, who despises them as if every one of them were responsible
for the breaking. alviarin, the white sister who had come with the amyrlin,
gave them a cool look and moved on. and not like a white, alanna said
with a laugh, who has no room in her life for any passions at all.
that was not what i meant, alanna sedai. i want to know what it means to
be a green sister. she was not sure alanna would understand, because she
was not certain she herself understood what she wanted to know, but alanna
nodded slowly as if she did.
browns seek knowledge, blues meddle in causes, and whites consider the
questions of truth with implacable logic. we all do some of it all, of course.
but to be a green means to stand ready. a note of pride entered alannas
voice. in the trolloc wars, we were often called the battle ajah. all aes
sedai helped where and when they could, but the green ajah alone was
always with the armies, in almost every battle. we were the counter to the
dreadlords. the battle ajah. and now we stand ready, for the trollocs to
come south again, for tarmon gaidon, the last battle. we will be there. that
is what it means to be a green.
thank you, aes sedai, egwene said. that is what i was? or what i will
be? light, i wish i knew if it was real, if it had anything at all to do with here


 and now.
the amyrlin joined them, and they swept deep curtsies to her. are you
well, daughter? she asked egwene. her eyes flicked to the corner of the
papers sticking out from under the novice dress in egwenes hands, then back
to egwenes face immediately. i will know the why of what occurred tonight
before i am done.
egwenes cheeks reddened. i am well, mother.
alanna surprised her by asking the amyrlin just what she had said she
would.
i never heard of such a thing, the amyrlin barked. the owner doesnt
muck out with the bilge boys even if he has run the boat on a mudflat. she
glanced at egwene, and worry tightened her eyes. and anger. i share your
concern, alanna. whatever this child has done, it did not deserve that. very
well. if it will assuage your feelings, you may visit sheriam. but it is to be
strictly between you two. ill not have aes sedai held up to ridicule, even
inside the tower.
egwene opened her mouth to confess all and let them take the ringi dont
want the bloody thing, reallybut alanna forestalled her.
and the other, mother?
do not be ridiculous, daughter. the amyrlin was angry, and sounded
more so by the word. youd be a laughingstock inside the day, except for
those who decided you were mad. and dont think it would not follow you.
tales like that have a way of traveling. you would find stories told of the
scullion aes sedai from tear to maradon. and that would reflect on every
sister. no. if you need to rid yourself of some feeling of guilt and cannot
handle it as a grown woman would, very well. i have told you that you may
visit sheriam. accompany her tonight when you leave here. that will give
you the rest of the night to decide if it was of any help. and tomorrow you
can start finding out what went wrong here tonight!
yes, mother. alannas voice was perfectly neutral.
the desire to confess had died in egwene. alanna had shown only one
brief flash of disappointment, when she realized the amyrlin would not allow
her to join egwene in the kitchens. she doesnt want to be punished any more
than any sensible person does. she did want an excuse to be in my company.
light, she couldnt have deliberately caused the terangreal to go wild; i did
that. can she be black ajah?


 wrapped in thought, egwene heard a throat cleared, then again, more
roughly. her eyes focused. the amyrlin was staring right into her, and when
she spoke, she bit off each word.
since you seem to be asleep standing up, child, i suggest you go to bed.
for one instant her glance flashed to the nearly concealed papers in egwenes
hands. you have much work to do tomorrow, and for many days thereafter.
her eyes held egwenes a moment longer, and then she was striding away
before any of them could curtsy.
sheriam rounded on alanna as soon as the amyrlin was out of earshot. the
green aes sedai glowered and took it in silence. you are mad, alanna! a
fool, and doubly a fool if you think i will go lightly on you just because we
were novices together. are you taken by the dragon, to? suddenly
sheriam became aware of egwene, and the target of her anger shifted. did i
not hear the amyrlin seat order you to your bed, accepted? if you breathe a
word of this, you will wish i had buried you in a field to manure the ground.
and i will see you in my study in the morning, when the bell rings first and
not one breath later. now, go!
egwene went, her head spinning. is there anybody i can trust? the
amyrlin? she sent us off chasing thirteen of the black ajah and forgot to
mention that thirteen is just the number needed to turn a woman who can
channel to the shadow against her will. who can i trust?
she did not want to be alone, could not stand the thought of it, and so she
hurried to the accepteds quarters, thinking that tomorrow she would be
moving there herself, and immediately after knocking pushed open nynaeves
door. she could trust her with anything. her and elayne.
but nynaeve was seated in one of the two chairs, with elaynes head
buried in her lap. elaynes shoulders shook to the sound of weeping, the softer
weeping that comes after no energy is left for deeper sobs but the emotion still
burns. dampness shone on nynaeves cheeks, too. the great serpent
gleaming on her hand, smoothing elaynes hair, matched the ring on the hand
elayne used to clutch at nynaeves skirt.
elayne lifted a face red and swollen from long crying, sniffing through her
sobs when she saw egwene. i could not be that awful, egwene. i just
couldnt!
the accident with the terangreal, egwenes fear that someone might have
read the papers verin had given her, her suspicions of everyone in that
chamber, all these had been terrible, but they had buffered her in a rough,


 ungentle way from what had happened inside the terangreal. they had come
from outside; the other was inside. elaynes words stripped the buffer away,
and what was inside hit egwene as if the ceiling had collapsed. rand her
husband, and joiya her baby. rand pinned and begging her to kill him. rand
chained to be gentled.
before she was aware of moving, she was on her knees beside elayne, all
the tears that should have fallen earlier coming out in a flood. i couldnt help
him, nynaeve, she sobbed. i just left him there.
nynaeve flinched as if struck, but the next moment her arms were around
both egwene and elayne, hugging them, rocking them. hush, she crooned
softly. it eases with time. it eases, a little. one day we will make them pay
our price. hush. hush.


 c h a p t e r
2 4


scouting and discoveries


sunlight through the carved shutters, creeping across the bed, woke mat. for
a moment, he only lay there, frowning. he had not reasoned out any plan for
escaping from tar valon before sleep had overtaken him, but neither had he
given up. too much memory still lay covered with fog, but he would not give
up.
two serving women came bustling with hot water and a tray heavy with
food, laughing and telling him how much better he looked already, and how
soon he would be back on his feet if he did what the aes sedai told him. he
answered them curtly, trying not to sound bitter. let them think i mean to go
along. his stomach rumbled at the smells from the tray.
when they left, he tossed aside his blanket and hopped out of bed, pausing
only to stuff half a slice of ham into his mouth before pouring out water to
wash and shave. staring into the mirror above the washstand, he paused in
lathering his face. he did look better.
his cheeks were still hollow, but not quite as hollow as they had been. the
dark circles had vanished from under his eyes, which no longer seemed set so
deep in his head. it was as if every bite he had eaten the night before had gone
into putting meat on his bones. he even felt stronger.
at this rate, he muttered, i will be gone before they know it. but he
was still surprised when, after shaving, he sat down and consumed every
scrap of ham, turnip, and pear on the tray.
he was sure they expected him to climb back into bed once he had eaten,
but instead, he dressed. stamping his feet to settle them in his boots, he eyed
his spare clothes and decided to leave them, for now. i have to know what im


 doing, first. and if i have to leave them. . . . he tucked the dice cups into his
pouch. with those, he could get all the clothes he needed.
opening the door, he peeked out. more doors paneled in pale, golden wood
lined the hall, with colorful tapestries between, and a runner of blue carpet ran
down the whitetiled floor. but there was no one out there. no guard. he
tossed his cloak over one shoulder and hurried out. now to find a way
outside.
it took some little wandering, down stairs and along corridors and across
open courts, before he found what he wanted, a doorway to the outside, and
he saw people before then: serving women and whiteclad novices hurrying
about their chores, the novices running even harder than the servants; a
handful of roughly dressed male servants carrying large chests and other
heavy loads; accepted in their banded dresses. even a few aes sedai.
the aes sedai did not seem to notice him as they strode along, intent on
whatever purpose, or else they gave him no more than a passing glance. his
were country clothes, but well made; he did not look a vagabond, and the
serving men showed that men were allowed in this part of the tower. he
suspected they might take him for another servant, and that was just as well
with him, so long as no one asked him to lift anything.
he did feel some regret that none of the women he saw was egwene or
nynaeve, or even elayne. shes a pretty one, even if she does have her nose in
the air half the time. and she could tell me how to find egwene and the
wisdom. i cannot go without saying goodbye. light, i dont suppose one of
them would turn me in, just because they are becoming aes sedai themselves?
burn me, for a fool! theyd never do that. anyway, i will risk it.
but once outofdoors, under a bright morning sky with only a few drifting
white clouds, he put the women from his mind for the time. he was looking
across a wide, flagstoned yard with a plain stone fountain in the middle and a
barracks on the other side that was made of gray stone. it looked almost like a
huge boulder among the few trees growing out of rimmed holes in the
flagstones close by. guardsmen in their shirtsleeves sat in front of the long,
low building, tending weapons and armor and harness. guardsmen were what
he wanted, now.
he sauntered across the yard and watched the soldiers as if he had nothing
better to do. as they worked they talked and laughed among themselves like
men after the harvest. now and again one of them looked curiously at mat as
he strolled among them, but none challenged his right to be there. from time


 to time he asked a casual question. and finally he got the answer he sought.
bridge guard? said a stocky, darkhaired man no more than five years
older than mat. his words had a heavy illianer accent. young he might have
been, but a thin white scar crossed his left cheek, and the hands oiling his
sword moved with familiarity and competence. he squinted up at mat before
returning to his task. i do be on the bridge guard, and back there again this
even. why do you ask?
i was just wondering what conditions were like on the other side of the
river. i might as well find that out, too. good for traveling? it cant be
muddy, unless you have had more rain than i know about.
which side of the river? the guardsman asked placidly. his eyes did not
lift from the oiled rag he was running along his blade.
uh . . . east. the east side.
no mud. whitecloaks. the man leaned to one side to spit, but his voice
did not change. whitecloaks do be poking their noses into every village for
ten miles. they have no hurt anyone yet, but them just being there do upset
the folk. fortune prick me if i do no think they wish to provoke us, for they
do look as if they would attack if they could. no good for anyone who do
want to travel.
what about west, then?
the same. the guardsman raised his eyes to mats. but you will no be
crossing, lad, east or west. your name do be matrim cauthon, or fortune
abandon me. last night a sister, herself in person, did come to the bridge
where i did stand guard. she did drill your features at us till each could speak
them back to her. a guest, she did say, and no to be harmed. but no to be
allowed out of the city, either, if you must be tied hand and foot to keep you
from it. his eyes narrowed. is it that you did steal something from them?
he asked doubtfully. you do no have the look of those the sisters do guest.
i didnt steal anything! mat said indignantly. burn me, i didnt even get a
chance to work around to it easy. they must all know me. im no thief!
no, it is no that i do see in your face. no thievery. but you do have the
look of the fellow who did try to sell me the horn of valere three days gone.
so he did claim it did be, all bent and battered as it did be. do you have a
horn of valere to sell? or mayhap it do be the dragons sword?
mat gave a jump at the mention of the horn, but he managed to keep his
voice level. i was sick. others of the guardsmen were looking at him now.


 light, theyll all know i am not supposed to leave, now. he forced a laugh.
the sisters healed me. some of the guardsmen frowned at him. perhaps
they thought other men should show more respect than to call the aes sedai
sisters. i guess the aes sedai dont want me to go before i have all my
strength back. he tried willing the men, all of those watching him now, to
accept that. just a man who was healed. nothing more. no reason to trouble
yourself about him any further.
the illianer nodded. you do have the look of sickness in your face, too.
perhaps that do be the reason. but never did i hear of so much effort to keep
one sick man in the city.
thats the reason, mat said firmly. they were all still looking at him.
well, i need to be going. they said i have to take walks. lots of long walks.
to build up strength, you know.
he felt their eyes following him as he left, and he scowled. he had simply
meant to find out how well his description had been passed around. if only the
officers among the bridge guards had had it, he might have been able to slip
by. he had always been good at slipping into places unseen. and out. it was a
talent you developed when your mother always suspected you were up to
some mischief and you had two sisters to tell on you. and now ive made sure
half a barracks full of guardsmen will know me. blood and bloody ashes!
much of the tower grounds were gardens full of trees, leatherleaf and
paperbark and elms, and he soon found himself walking along a wide,
twisting graveled path. it could have led through countryside, if not for the
towers visible over the treetops. and the white bulk of the tower itself,
behind him but pressing on him as if he carried it on his shoulders. if there
were ways out of the tower grounds that were not watched, this seemed the
place to find them. if they existed.
a girl in novice white appeared ahead on the path, striding purposefully
toward him. wrapped in her own thoughts, she did not see him at first. when
she came close enough for him to make out her big, dark eyes and the way her
hair was braided, he grinned suddenly. he knew this girlmemory drifting
up from shrouded depthsthough he would never have expected to find her
here. he had never expected to see her again at all. he grinned to himself.
good luck to balance bad. as he remembered, she had quite an eye for the
boys.
else, he called to her. else grinwell. you remember me, dont you? mat
cauthon. a friend and i visited your fathers farm. remember? have you


 decided to become aes sedai, then?
she stopped short, staring at him. what are you doing up and out? she
said coldly.
you know about that, do you? he moved closer to her, but she stepped
back, keeping her distance. he stopped. its not catching. i was healed,
else. those large, dark eyes seemed more knowing than he remembered, and
not nearly so warm, but he supposed studying to be an aes sedai could do
that. what is the matter, else? you look like you dont know me.
i know you, she said. her manner was not as he remembered, either; he
thought she could give elayne lessons now. i have . . . work to be about. let
me by.
he grimaced. the path was broad enough for six to walk abreast without
crowding. i told you it isnt catching.
let me by!
muttering to himself, he stepped to one edge of the gravel. she went past
him along the other side, watching to make sure he did not come closer. once
by, she quickened her steps, glancing over her shoulder at him until she was
out of sight around a bend.
wanted to make sure i didnt follow her, he thought sourly. first the
guardsmen, and now else. my luck is not in, today.
he started off again, and soon heard a ferocious clatter from one side
ahead, like dozens of sticks being beat together. curious, he turned off toward
it, into the trees.
a little way brought him to a large expanse of bare ground, the earth beaten
hard, at least fifty paces across and nearly twice as long. at intervals around it
under the trees stood wooden stands holding quarterstaffs, and practice
swords made of strips of wood bound loosely together, and a few real swords
and axes and spears.
spaced across the open ground, pairs of men, most stripped to the waist,
flailed at each other with more practice swords. some moved so smoothly it
almost seemed they danced with one another, flowing from stance to stance,
stroke to counterstroke in continuous motion. there was nothing quickly
apparent aside from skill to mark them from the others, but mat was sure he
was watching warders.
those who did not move so smoothly were all younger, each pair under the


 watchful eyes of an older man who seemed to radiate a dangerous grace even
standing still. warders and students, mat decided.
he was not the only audience. not ten paces from him, half a dozen women
with ageless aes sedai faces and as many more in the banded white dresses
of the accepted stood watching one pair of students, bare to the waist and
slick with sweat, under the guidance of a warder shaped much like a block of
stone. the warder used a shortstemmed pipe in one hand, trailing tabac
smoke, to direct his pupils.
sitting down crosslegged under a leatherleaf, mat rooted three large
pebbles out of the ground and began to juggle them idly. he did not feel
weak, exactly, but it was good to sit. if there was a way out of the tower
grounds, it would not go away while he took a short rest.
before he had been there five minutes he knew who it was the aes sedai
and accepted were watching. one of the blocky warders pupils was a tall,
lithe young man who moved like a cat. and almost as pretty as a girl, mat
thought wryly. every woman was staring at the tall fellow with sparkling
eyes, even the aes sedai.
the tall man handled his practice sword almost as deftly as the warders,
now and then earning an approving gravelly comment from his teacher. it was
not that his opponent, a youth more mats age, with redgold hair, was
unskilled. far from it, as much as mat could see, though he had never claimed
to know anything about swords. the goldenhaired man met every lightning
attack, turning it away before the bound strips could strike him, and even
launched an occasional attack of his own. but the handsome fellow countered
those attacks and flowed back into his own in the space of a heartbeat.
mat shifted the pebbles to one hand, but kept them spinning in the air. he
did not think he would care to face either of them. certainly not with a sword.
break! the warders voice sounded like rocks emptying out of a bucket.
chests heaving, the two men let their practice swords fall to their sides. sweat
matted their hair. you can rest till i finish my pipe. but rest fast; i am almost
in the dottle.
now that they had stopped dancing about, mat got a good look at the youth
with the redgold hair and let the pebbles drop. burn me, ill bet my whole
purse thats elaynes brother. and the other ones galad, or ill eat my boots.
on the journey from toman head it had seemed half of elaynes conversation
had been of gawyns virtues and galads vices. oh, gawyn had some vices
according to elayne, but they were small; to mat they sounded like the sort of


 things no one but a sister would consider vices at all. as for galad, once
elayne was pinned down, he sounded like what every mother said she wanted
her son to be. mat did not think he wanted to spend much time in galads
company. egwene blushed whenever galad was mentioned, though she
seemed to think no one noticed.
a ripple seemed to pass through the watching women when gawyn and
galad stopped, and they appeared on the point of stepping forward almost as
one. but gawyn caught sight of mat, said something quietly to galad, and the
two of them walked by the women. the aes sedai and accepted turned to
follow with their eyes. mat scrambled to his feet as the pair approached.
you are mat cauthon, are you not? gawyn said with a grin. i was sure i
recognized you from egwenes description. and elaynes. i understand you
were sick. are you better now?
im fine, mat said. he wondered if he was supposed to call gawyn my
lord or something of the sort. he had refused to call elayne my lady
not that she had demanded it, actuallyand he decided he would not do her
brother better.
did you come to the practice yard to learn the sword? galad asked.
mat shook his head. i was only out walking. i dont know much about
swords. i think ill put my trust in a good bow, or a good quarterstaff. i know
how to use those.
if you spend much time around nynaeve, galad said, youll need bow,
quarterstaff, and sword to protect yourself. and i dont know whether that
would be enough.
gawyn looked at him wonderingly. galad, you just very nearly made a
joke.
i do have a sense of humor, gawyn, galad said with a frown. you only
think i do not because i do not care to mock people.
with a shake of his head, gawyn turned back to mat. you should learn
something of the sword. everyone can do with that sort of knowledge these
days. your friendrand althorcarried a most unusual sword. what do
you hear of him?
i havent seen rand in a long time, mat said quickly. just for a moment,
when he had mentioned rand, gawyns look had gained intensity. light, does
he know about rand? he couldnt. if he did, hed be denouncing me for a
darkfriend just for being rands friend. but he knows something. swords


 arent the beall and endall, you know. i could do fairly well against either of
you, i think, if you had a sword and i had my quarterstaff.
gawyns cough was obviously meant to swallow a laugh. much too
politely, he said, you must be very good. galads face was frankly
disbelieving.
perhaps it was that they both clearly thought he was making a wild boast.
perhaps it was because he had mishandled questioning the guardsman.
perhaps it was because else, who had such an eye for the boys, wanted
nothing to do with him, and all those women were staring at galad like cats
watching a jug of cream. aes sedai and accepted or not, they were still
women. all these explanations ran through mats head, but he rejected them
angrily, especially the last. he was going to do it because it would be fun.
and it might earn some coin. his luck would not even have to be back.
i will wager, he said, two silver marks to two from each of you that i
can beat both of you at once, just the way i said. you cant have fairer odds
than that. there are two of you, and one of me, so two to one are fair odds.
he almost laughed aloud at the consternation on their faces.
mat, gawyn said, theres no need to make wagers. you have been sick.
perhaps we will try this some time when you are stronger.
it would be far from a fair wager, galad said. ill not take your wager,
now or later. you are from the same village as egwene, are you not? i . . . i
would not have her angry with me.
what does she have to do with it? thump me once with one of your
swords, and i will hand over a silver mark to each of you. if i thump you till
you quit, you give me two each. dont you think you can do it?
this is ridiculous, galad said. you would have no chance against one
trained swordsman, let alone two. ill not take such advantage.
do you think that? asked a gravel voice. the blocky warder joined them,
thick black eyebrows pulled down in a scowl. you think you two are good
enough with your swords to take a boy with a stick?
it would not be fair, hammar gaidin, galad said.
he has been sick, gawyn added. there is no need for this.
to the yard, hammar grated with a jerk of his head back over his
shoulder. galad and gawyn gave mat regretful looks, then obeyed. the
warder eyed mat up and down doubtfully. are you sure youre up to this,


 lad? now i take a close look at you, you ought to be in a sickbed.
i am already out of one, mat said, and im up to it. i have to be. i dont
want to lose my two marks.
hammars heavy brows rose in surprise. you mean to hold to that wager,
lad?
i need the money. mat laughed.
his laughter cut off abruptly as he turned toward the nearest stand that held
quarterstaffs and his knees almost buckled. he stiffened them so quickly he
thought anyone who noticed would think he had just stumbled. at the stand
he took his time choosing out a staff, nearly two inches thick and almost a
foot taller than he was. i have to win this. i opened my fool mouth, and now i
have to win. i cant afford to lose those two marks. without those to build on,
it will take forever to win the money i need.
when he turned back, the quarterstaff in both hands before him, gawyn
and galad were already waiting out where they had been practicing. i have to
win. luck, he muttered. time to toss the dice.
hammar gave him an odd look. you speak the old tongue, lad?
mat stared back at him for a moment, not speaking. he felt cold to the
bone. with an effort, he made his feet start out onto the practice yard.
remember the wager, he said loudly. two silver marks from each of you
against two from me.
a buzz rose from the accepted as they realized what was happening. the
aes sedai watched in silence. disapproving silence.
gawyn and galad split apart, one to either side of him, keeping their
distance, neither with his sword more than halfraised.
no wager, gawyn said. theres no wager.
at the same time, galad said, ill not take your money like this.
i mean to take yours, mat said.
done! hammar roared. if they have not the nerve to cover your wager,
lad, ill pay the score myself.
very well, gawyn said. if you insist on itdone!
galad hesitated a moment more before growling, done, then. let us put
an end to this farce.


 the moments warning was all mat needed. as galad rushed at him, he slid
his hands along the quarterstaff and pivoted. the end of the staff thudded into
the tall mans ribs, bringing a grunt and a stumble. mat let the staff bounce off
galad and spun, carrying it on around just as gawyn came within range. the
staff dipped, darted under gawyns practice sword, and clipped his ankle out
from under him. as gawyn fell, mat completed the spin in time to catch
galad across his upraised wrist, sending his practice sword flying. as if his
wrist did not pain him at all, galad threw himself into a smooth, rolling dive
and came up with his sword in both hands.
ignoring him for the moment, mat half turned, twisting his wrists to whip
the length of the staff back beside him. gawyn, just starting to rise, took the
blow on the side of his head with a loud thump only partly softened by the
padding of hair. he went down in a heap.
mat was only vaguely aware of an aes sedai rushing out to tend elaynes
fallen brother. i hope hes all right. he should be. ive hit myself harder than
that falling off a fence. he still had galad to deal with, and from the way
galad was poised on the balls of his feet, sword raised precisely, he had
begun to take mat seriously.
mats legs chose that moment to tremble. light, i cant weaken now. but he
could feel it creeping back in, the wobbly feeling, the hunger as if he had not
eaten for days. if i wait for him to come to me, ill fall on my face. it was hard
to keep his knees straight as he started forward. luck, stay with me.
from the first blow, he knew that luck, or skill, or whatever had brought
him this far, was still there. galad managed to turn that one with a sharp
clack, and the next, and the next, and the next, but strain stiffened his face.
that smooth swordsman, almost as good as the warders, fought with every
ounce of his skill to keep mats staff from him. he did not attack; it was all he
could do to defend. he moved continually to the side, trying not to be forced
back, and mat pressed him, staff a blur. and galad stepped back, stepped
back again, wooden blade a thin shield against the quarterstaff.
hunger gnawed at mat as if he had swallowed weasels. sweat rolled down
into his eyes, and his strength began to fade as if it leached out with the sweat.
not yet. i cant fall yet. i have to win. now. with a roar, he threw all his
reserves into one last surge.
the quarterstaff flickered past galads sword and in quick succession
struck knee, wrist, and ribs and finally thrust into galads stomach like a
spear. with a groan, galad folded over, fighting not to fall. the staff quivered


 in mats hands, on the point of a final crushing thrust to the throat. galad sank
to the ground.
mat almost dropped the quarterstaff when he realized what he had been
about to do. win, not kill. light, what was i thinking? reflexively he
grounded the butt of the staff, and as soon he did, he had to clutch at it to hold
himself erect. hunger hollowed him like a knife reaming marrow from a
bone. suddenly he realized that not only the aes sedai and accepted were
watching. all practice, all learning, had stopped. warders and students alike
stood watching him.
hammar moved to stand beside galad, still groaning on the ground and
trying to push himself up. the warder raised his voice to shout, who was the
greatest blademaster of all time?
from the throats of dozens of students came a massed bellow. jearom,
gaidin!
yes! hammar shouted, turning to make sure all heard. during his
lifetime, jearom fought over ten thousand times, in battle and single combat.
he was defeated once. by a farmer with a quarterstaff! remember that.
remember what you just saw. he lowered his eyes to galad, and lowered his
voice as well. if you cannot get up by now, lad, it is finished. he raised a
hand, and the aes sedai and accepted rushed to surround galad.
mat slid down the staff to his knees. none of the aes sedai even glanced
his way. one of the accepted did, a plump girl he might have liked to ask for
a dance if she were not going to be an aes sedai. she frowned at him, sniffed,
and turned back to peering at what the aes sedai were doing around galad.
gawyn was on his feet, mat noted with relief. he pulled himself up as
gawyn came over. mustnt let them know. ill never get out of here if they
decide to nurse me from sunup to sunup. blood darkened the redgold hair on
the side of gawyns head, but there was neither cut nor bruise apparent.
he pushed two silver marks into mats hand with a dry i think i will listen
next time. he noticed mats glance, touched his head. they healed it, but it
was not bad. elayne has given me worse more than once. you are good with
that.
not as good as my da. hes won the quarterstaff at bel tine every year as
long as i can remember, except once or twice when rands da did. that
interested look came back into gawyns eyes, and mat wished he had never
mentioned tam althor. the aes sedai and the accepted were all still
clustered around galad. i . . . i must have hurt him badly. i did not mean to


 do that.
gawyn glanced that waythere was nothing to be seen but two rings of
womens backs, accepteds white dresses making the outer ring as they
peered over the shoulders of crouching aes sedaiand laughed. you did not
kill himi heard him groaningso he should be on his feet by now, but they
are not going to let this chance pass, now they have their hands on him. light,
four of them are green ajah! mat gave him a confused lookgreen ajah?
what does that have to do with anything?and gawyn shook his head. it
doesnt matter. just rest assured that the worst galad has to worry about is
finding himself warder to a green aes sedai before his head clears. he
laughed. no, they would not do that. but i will wager you those two marks
of mine in your hand that some of them wish they could.
not your marks, mat said, shoving them in his coat pocket, mine. the
explanation had made little sense to him. except that galad was well. all he
knew of what passed between warders and aes sedai were the pieces he
remembered of lan and moiraine, and there was nothing there like what
gawyn seemed to be suggesting. do you think theyd mind if i collected my
wager from him?
they very likely would, hammar said dryly as he joined them. you are
not very popular with those particular aes sedai right now. he snorted.
youd think even green aes sedai would be better than girls just loose from
their mothers apron strings. he isnt that goodlooking.
he is not, mat agreed.
gawyn grinned at both of them, until hammar glared at him. here, the
warder said, pushing two more silver coins into mats hand. i will collect
from galad later. where are you from, lad?
manetheren. mat froze when he heard the name come out of his mouth.
i mean, im from the two rivers. i have heard too many old stories. they
just looked at him without saying anything. i. . . . i think i will go back and
see if i can find something to eat. not even the midmorning bell had rung
yet, but they nodded as if it made sense.
he kept the quarterstaffno one had told him to put it backand walked
slowly until the trees hid him from the practice yard. when they did, he
leaned on the staff as though it were the only thing holding him up. he was
not sure it was not.
he thought that if he parted his coat, he would see a hole where his
stomach should have been, a hole growing larger as it pulled the rest of him


 in. but he hardly thought of hunger. he kept hearing voices in his head. you
speak the old tongue, lad? manetheren. it made him shiver. light help me, i
keep digging myself deeper. i have to get out of here. but how? he hobbled
back toward the tower proper like an old, old man. how?


 c h a p t e r
2 5


questions


egwene lay across nynaeves bed, chin in her hands, watching nynaeve
pace back and forth. elayne sprawled in front of the fireplace, which was still
full of the ashes of last nights fire. yet again elayne was studying the list of
names verin had produced, patiently reading every word one more time. the
other pages, the list of terangreal, sat on the table; after one shocked reading
they had not discussed that one further, though they had talked of everything
else. and argued, too.
egwene stifled a yawn. it was only the middle of the morning, but none of
them had gotten much sleep. they had had to be up early. for the kitchens,
and breakfast. for other things that she refused to think about. the little sleep
she herself had managed had been filled with unpleasant dreams. maybe
anaiya could help me understand them, those that need understanding, but.
. . . but what if she is black ajah? after staring at every woman in that
chamber last night, wondering which was black ajah, she was finding trust
for anyone but her two companions hard to come by. but she did wish she had
some way of interpreting those dreams.
the nightmares about what had happened inside the terangreal last night
were easy enough to understand, though they had made her wake up weeping.
she had dreamed of the seanchan, too, of women in dresses with lightning
bolts woven on their breasts, collaring a long line of women who wore great
serpent rings, forcing them to call lightning against the white tower. that
had started her awake in a cold sweat, but that had to be just a nightmare, too.
and the dream about whitecloaks binding her fathers hands. a nightmare
brought on by homesickness, she supposed. but the others. . . .
she glanced at the other two women again. elayne was still reading.


 nynaeve still paced with that steady tread.
there had been a dream of rand, reaching for a sword that seemed to be
made of crystal, never seeing the fine net dropping over him. and one of him
kneeling in a chamber where a parched wind blew dust across the floor, and
creatures like the one on the dragon banner, but much smaller, floated on that
wind, and settled into his skin. there had been a dream of him walking down
into a great hole in a black mountain, a hole filled with a reddish glare as from
vast fires below, and even a dream of him confronting seanchan.
about that last, she was uncertain, but she knew the others had to mean
something. back when she had been sure she could trust anaiya, back before
she had left the tower, before she learned the reality of the black ajah, a little
cautious questioning of the aes sedaidone, oh, so carefully, so anaiya
would think it no more than the curiosity she showed about other thingshad
revealed that a dreamers dreams about taveren were almost always
significant, and the more strongly taveren, the more almost always became
certainly.
but mat and perrin were taveren, too, and she had also dreamed of them.
odd dreams, even more difficult to understand than the dreams of rand.
perrin with a falcon on his shoulder, and perrin with a hawk. only the hawk
held a leash in her talonsegwene was somehow convinced both hawk and
falcon were femaleand the hawk was trying to fasten it around perrins
neck. that made her shiver even now; she did not like dreams about leashes.
and that dream of perrinwith a beard!leading a huge pack of wolves that
stretched as far as the eye could see. those about mat had been even nastier.
mat, placing his own left eye on a balance scale. mat, hanging by his neck
from a tree limb. there had been a dream of mat and seanchan, too, but she
was willing to dismiss that as a nightmare. it had to have been just a
nightmare. just like the one about mat speaking the old tongue. that had to
come from what she had heard during his healing.
she sighed, and the sigh turned into another yawn. she and the others had
gone to his room after breakfast to see how he was, but he had not been there.
he is probably well enough to go dancing. light, now i will probably
dream about him dancing with seanchan! no more dreams, she told herself
firmly. not now. i will think about them when i am not so tired. she thought of
the kitchens, of the midday meal soon to come, and then supper, and breakfast
again tomorrow, and pots and cleaning and scrubbing going on forever. if i
am ever not tired again. shifting her position on the bed, she looked at her
friends again. elayne still had her eyes on the list of names. nynaeves steps


 had slowed. any moment now, nynaeve will say it again. any moment.
nynaeve came to a halt, staring down at elayne. put those away. we have
been over them twenty times, and there isnt a word that helps. verin gave us
rubbish. the question is, was it all she had, or did she give us rubbish on
purpose?
as expected. maybe half an hour till she says it again. egwene frowned
down at her hands, glad she could not see them clearly. the great serpent
ring lookedout of placeon hands all wrinkled from long immersion in
hot, soapy water.
knowing their names helps, elayne said, still reading. knowing what
they look like helps.
you know very well what i mean, nynaeve snapped.
egwene sighed and folded her arms in front of her, rested her chin on them.
when she had come out of sheriams study that morning, with the sun still
not even a glint on the horizon, nynaeve had been waiting with a candle in
the cold, dark hall. she had not been seeing very clearly, but she was sure
nynaeve had looked ready to chew stone. and knowing chewing stones
would not change anything in the next few minutes. that was why she was so
irritable. shes as touchy about her pride as any man i ever met. but she
should not take it out on elayne and me. light, if elayne can stand it, she
should be able to. she isnt the wisdom anymore.
elayne hardly appeared to notice whether nynaeve was irritable or not. she
frowned into the distance thoughtfully. liandrin was the only red. all the
other ajahs lost two each.
oh, do be quiet, child, nynaeve said.
elayne wiggled her left hand to display her great serpent ring, gave
nynaeve a meaningful look, and went right on. no two were born in the
same city, and no more than two in any one country. amico nagoyin was the
youngest, some fifteen years older than egwene and i. joiya byir could be our
greatgrandmothers greatgrandmother.
egwene did not like it that one of the black ajah shared her daughters
name. fool girl! people sometimes have the same name, and you never had a
daughter. it wasnt real!
and what does that tell us? nynaeves voice was too calm; she was ready
to explode like a wagon full of fireworks. what secrets have you found in it
that i missed? i am getting old and blind, after all!


 it tells us it is all too neat, elayne said calmly. what chance that thirteen
women chosen solely because they were darkfriends would be so neatly
arrayed across age, across nations, across ajahs? shouldnt there be perhaps
three reds, or four born in cairhien, or just two the same age, if it was all
chance? they had women to choose from or they could not have chosen so
random a pattern. there are still black ajah in the tower, or elsewhere we
dont know about. it must mean that.
nynaeve gave her braid one ferocious tug. light! i think you may be right.
you did find secrets i couldnt. light, i was hoping they all went with
liandrin.
we do not even know that she is their leader, elayne said. she could
have been ordered to . . . to dispose of us. her mouth twisted. i am afraid i
can only think of one reason for them to go to such lengths to spread
everything out so, to avoid any pattern except a lack of pattern. i think it
means there is a pattern of some kind to the black ajah.
if theres a pattern, nynaeve said firmly, we will find it. elayne, if
watching your mother run her court taught you to think like this, im glad you
watched closely. elaynes answering smile made a dimple in her cheek.
egwene eyed the older woman carefully. it seemed nynaeve was finally
ready to stop being a bear with a sore tooth. she raised her head. unless they
want us to think theyre hiding a pattern, so we will waste our time hunting
for it when there isnt one. i am not saying there isnt; i am only saying we do
not know yet. lets look for it, but i think we ought to look at other things,
too, dont you?
so you finally decided to rouse, nynaeve said. i thought you had gone
to sleep. but she was still smiling.
she is right, elayne said disgustedly. i have built a bridge out of straw.
worse than straw. wishes. maybe you are right, too, nynaeve. what use is
thisthis rubbish? she snatched one paper out of the stack in front of her.
rianna has black hair with a white streak above her left ear. if i am close
enough to see that, its closer than i want to be. she grabbed another page.
chesmal emry is one of the most talented healers anyone has seen in years.
light, could you imagine being healed by one of the black ajah? a third
sheet. marillin gemalphin is fond of cats and goes out of her way to help
injured animals. cats! paah! she scrabbled all the pages together, crumpling
them in her fists. it is useless rubbish.
nynaeve knelt beside her and gently pried her hands from around the


 papers. perhaps, and perhaps not. she smoothed the pages carefully on her
breast. you found in them something for us to look for. perhaps we will find
more, if we are persistent. and there is the other list. both her eyes and
elaynes darted to egwene, brown and blue alike frowning worriedly.
egwene avoided looking at the table where the other sheets lay. she did not
want to think about them, but she could not avoid it. the list of terangreal
had etched itself into her mind.
item. a rod of clear crystal, smooth and perfectly clear, one foot long and
one inch in diameter. use unknown. last study made by corianin nedeal.
item. a figurine of an unclothed woman in alabaster, one hand tall. use
unknown. last study made by corianin nedeal. item. a disc, apparently of
simple iron yet untouched by rust, three inches in diameter, finely engraved
on both sides with a tight spiral. use unknown. last study made by corianin
nedeal. item. too many items, and more than half the use unknowns last
studied by corianin nedeal. thirteen of them, to be exact.
egwene shivered. its getting so i do not even like to think of that number.
the knowns on the list were fewer, not all of any apparent real use, but
hardly more comforting, as she saw it. a wooden carving of a hedgehog, no
bigger than the last joint of a mans thumb. such a simple thing, and surely
harmless. any woman who tried to channel through it went to sleep. half a
day of peaceful, dreamless sleep, but it was too close not to make her skin
crawl. three more had to do with sleep in some way. it was almost a relief to
read of a fluted rod of black stone, a full pace in length, that produced
balefire, with the notation dangerous and almost impossible to control
writ so strong in verins hand that it tore the paper in two places. egwene still
had no idea what balefire was, but though it surely sounded dangerous if
anything ever did, it just as surely had nothing to do corianin nedeal or
dreams.
nynaeve carried the smoothedout pages to the table and set them down.
she hesitated before spreading the others out and running her finger down one
page, then the next. heres one mat would enjoy, she said in a voice much
too light and airy. item. a carved cluster of six spotted dice, joined at the
corners, less than two inches across. use unknown, save that channeling
through it seems to suspend chance in some way, or twist it. she began to
read aloud.  tossed coins presented the same face every time, and in one
test landed balanced on edge one hundred times in a row. one thousand tosses
of the dice produced five crowns one thousand times.  she gave a forced
laugh. mat would love that.


 egwene sighed and got to her feet, walked stiffly to the fireplace. elayne
scrambled up, watching as silently as nynaeve. pushing her sleeve as far up
her arm as it would go, egwene reached carefully up the chimney. her fingers
touched wool on the smoke shelf, and she pulled out a wadded, singed
stocking with a hard lump in the toe. she brushed a smear of soot from her
arm, then took the stocking to the table and shook it out. the twisted ring of
striped, flecked stone spun across the tabletop and fell flat atop a page of the
terangreal list. for a few moments they just stared at it.
perhaps, nynaeve said finally, verin simply missed the fact that so
many of them were last studied by corianin. she did not sound as if she
really believed it.
elayne nodded, but doubtfully. i saw her walking in the rain once, soaking
wet, and took a cloak to her. she was so wrapped up in whatever she was
thinking, i do not believe she knew it was raining until i put the cloak around
her shoulders. she could have missed it.
maybe, egwene said. if she did not, she had to know id notice as soon
as i read the list. i do not know. sometimes i think verin notices more than
she lets on. i just do not know.
so theres verin to suspect, elayne sighed. if she is black ajah, then
they know exactly what we are doing. and alanna. she gave egwene an
uncertain, sidelong look.
egwene had told them everything. except what happened inside the
terangreal during her testing; she could not bring herself to talk about that,
any more than nynaeve or elayne could tell of their testings. everything that
happened in the testing chamber, what sheriam had said about the terrible
weakness conferred by the ability to channel, every word verin had said,
whether it seemed important or not. the one part they had had trouble
accepting was alanna; aes sedai just did not do things like that. no one in
her right mind did anything like that, but aes sedai least of all.
egwene glowered at them, almost hearing them say it. aes sedai are not
supposed to lie, either, but verin and the mother seem awfully close with
what they tell us. there are not supposed to be black ajah.
i like alanna. nynaeve tugged her braid, then shrugged. oh, very well.
perhathat is, she did behave oddly.
thank you, egwene said, and nynaeve gave her an acknowledging nod
as if she had heard no sarcasm.


 in any case, the amyrlin knows of it, and she can keep an eye on alanna
far more easily than we can.
what about elaida and sheriam? egwene asked.
i have never been able to like elaida, elayne said, but i cannot truly
believe she is black ajah. and sheriam? its impossible.
nynaeve snorted. it should be impossible for any of them. when we do
find them, there is nothing says theyll all be women we do not like. but i
dont mean to put suspicionnot this kind of suspicion!on any woman. we
need more to go on than that they might have seen something they shouldnt.
egwene nodded agreement as quickly as elayne, and nynaeve went on: we
will tell the amyrlin that much, and put no more weight to it than it deserves.
if she ever looks in on us as she said she would. if you are with us when she
comes, elayne, remember she does not know about you.
i am not likely to forget it, elayne said fervently. but we should have
some other way to get word to her. my mother would have planned it better.
not if she could not trust her messengers, nynaeve said. we will wait.
unless you two think one of us should have a talk with verin? no one would
think that remarkable.
elayne hesitated, then gave her head a small shake. egwene was quicker
and more vigorous with hers; slip of the mind or not, verin had left out too
much to be trusted.
good. nynaeve sounded more than satisfied. i am just as pleased we
cannot talk to the amyrlin when we choose. this way we make our own
decisions, act when and as we decide, without her directing our every step.
her hand ran down the pages listing stolen terangreal as if she were reading
it again, then closed on the striped stone ring. and the first decision concerns
this. its the first thing we have seen that has any real connection to liandrin
and the others. she frowned at the ring, then took a deep breath. i am going
to sleep with it tonight.
egwene did not hesitate before taking the ring out of nynaeves hand. she
wanted to hesitateshe wanted to keep her hands by her sidesbut she did
not, and she was pleased. i am the one they say might be a dreamer. i do not
know whether that gives me any advantage, but verin said its dangerous
using this. whichever of us uses it, she needs any advantage she can find.
nynaeve gripped her braid and opened her mouth as if to protest. when she
finally spoke, though, it was to say, are you sure, egwene? we do not even


 know if you are a dreamer, and i can channel more strongly than you. i still
think i egwene cut her off.
you can channel more strongly if you are angry. can you be sure youll be
angry in a dream? will you have time to become angry before you need to
channel? light, we dont even know that anyone can channel in a dream. if
one of us has to do itand you are right; it is the only connection we have
it should be me. maybe i really am a dreamer. besides, verin did give it to
me.
nynaeve looked as if she wanted to argue, but at last she gave a grudging
nod. very well. but elayne and i will be there. i do not know what we can
do, but if anything goes wrong, perhaps we can wake you up, or. . . . we will
be there. elayne nodded, too.
now that she had their agreement, egwene felt a queasiness in the pit of
her stomach. i talked them into it. i wish i did not want them to talk me out of
it. she became aware of a woman standing in the doorway, a woman in
novice white, with her hair in long braids.
did no one ever teach you to knock, else? nynaeve said.
egwene hid the stone ring inside her fist. she had the strangest feeling that
else had been staring at it.
i have a message for you, else said calmly. her eyes studied the table,
with all the papers scattered on it, then the three women around it. from the
amyrlin.
egwene exchanged wondering looks with nynaeve and elayne.
well, what is it? nynaeve demanded.
else arched an eyebrow in amusement. the belongings left behind by
liandrin and the others were put in the third storeroom on the right from the
main stairs in the second basement under the library. she glanced at the
papers on the table again and left, neither hurrying nor moving slowly.
egwene felt as if she could not breathe. were afraid to trust anybody, and
the amyrlin decides to trust else grinwell of all women?
that fool girl cannot be trusted not to blab to anyone wholl listen!
nynaeve started for the door.
egwene grabbed up her skirts and darted past her at a run. her shoes
skidded on the tiles of the gallery, but she caught a glimpse of white vanishing
down the nearest ramp and dashed after it. she must be running, too, to be so


 far ahead already. why is she running? the flash of white was already
disappearing down another ramp. egwene followed.
a woman turned to face her at the foot of the ramp, and egwene stopped in
confusion. whoever she was, this was certainly not else. all in silver and
white silk, she sparked feelings egwene had never had before. she was taller,
more beautiful by far, and the look in her black eyes made egwene feel small,
scrawny, and none too clean. she can probably channel more of the power
than i can, too. light, she is probably smarter than all three of us put together
on top of it. it isnt fair for one woman toabruptly she realized the way her
thoughts were going. her cheeks reddened, and she gave herself a shake. she
had never feltlessthan any other woman before, and she was not about to
start now.
bold, the woman said. you are bold to go running about so, alone,
where so many murders have been done. she sounded almost pleased.
egwene drew herself up and straightened her dress hurriedly, hoping the
other woman would not notice, knowing she did, wishing the woman had not
seen her running like a child. stop that! pardon, but i am looking for a
novice who came this way, i think. she has large, dark eyes and dark hair in
braids. shes plump, and pretty in a way. did you see which way she went?
the tall woman looked her up and down in an amused way. egwene could
not be sure, but she thought the woman might have glanced a moment at the
clenched fist by her side, where she still held the stone ring. i do not think
you will catch up to her. i saw her, and she was running quite fast. i suspect
she is far away from here by now.
aes sedai, egwene began, but she was given no chance to ask which
way else had gone. something that might have been anger, or annoyance,
flashed through those black eyes.
i have taken up enough time with you for now. i have more important
matters to see to. leave me. she gestured back the way egwene had come.
so strong was the command in her voice that egwene turned and was three
steps up the ramp before she realized what she was doing. bristling, she spun
back. aes sedai or no, i
the gallery was empty.
frowning, she dismissed the nearest doorsno one lived in those rooms,
except possibly miceand ran down the ramp, peered both ways, followed
the curve of the gallery with her eyes all the way around. she even peered


 over the rail, down into the small garden of the accepted, and studied the
other galleries, higher as well as lower. she saw two accepted in their banded
dresses, one faolain and the other a woman she knew by sight if not name.
but there was no woman in silver and white anywhere.


 c h a p t e r
2 6


behind a lock


shaking her head, egwene walked back to the doors she had dismissed. she
had to go somewhere. inside the first, the few furnishings were shapeless
mounds under dusty cloths, and the air seemed stale, as if the door had not
been opened in some time. she grimaced; there were mouse tracks in the dust
on the floor. but no others. two more doors, opened hastily, showed the same
thing. it was no surprise. there were many more empty rooms than occupied
in the accepteds galleries.
when she pulled her head out of the third room, nynaeve and elayne were
coming down the ramp behind her with no particular haste.
is she hiding? nynaeve asked in surprise. in there?
i lost her. egwene peered both ways along the curving gallery again.
where did she go? she did not mean else.
if i had thought else could outrun you, elayne said with a smile, id
have chased her, too, but she has always looked too plump for running to
me. her smile was worried, though.
we will have to find her later, nynaeve said, and make sure she knows
to keep her mouth shut. how could the amyrlin trust that girl?
i thought i was right on top of her, egwene said slowly, but it was
someone else. nynaeve, i turned my back for a moment, and she was gone.
not elsei never even saw her!the woman i thought was else at first. she
was justgone, and i dont know where.
elaynes breath caught. one of the soulless? she looked around hastily,
but the gallery was still empty except for the three of them.


 not her, egwene said firmly. she i am not going to tell them she
made me feel six years old, with a torn dress, a dirty face, and a runny nose.
she was no gray man. she was tall and striking, with black eyes and black
hair. youd notice her in a crowd of a thousand. i have never seen her before,
but i think she is aes sedai. she must be.
nynaeve waited, as though for more, then said impatiently, if you see her
again, point her out to me. if you think theres cause. weve no time to stand
here talking. i mean to see what is in that storeroom before else has a chance
to tell the wrong person about it. maybe they were careless. lets not give
them a chance to correct it, if they were.
as she fell in beside nynaeve, with elayne on the other side, egwene
realized she still had the stone ringcorianin nedeals terangrealclutched
in her fist. reluctantly, she tucked it into her pouch and pulled the drawstrings
tight. as long as i dont go to sleep with the bloodybut thats what i am
planning, isnt it?
but that was for tonight, and no use worrying about it now. as they made
their way through the tower, she kept an eye out for the woman in silver and
white. she was not sure why she was relieved not to see her. i am a grown
woman, and quite capable, thank you. still, she was just as glad that no one
they encountered looked even remotely like her. the more she thought of the
woman, the more she felt there was somethingwrongabout her. light, i
am starting to see the black ajah under my bed. only, maybe they are under
the bed.
the library stood a little apart from the tall, thick shaft of the white tower
proper, its pale stone heavily streaked with blue, and it looked much like
crashing waves frozen at their climax. those waves loomed as large as a
palace in the morning light, and egwene knew they certainly contained as
many rooms as one, but all those roomsthose below the odd corridors in the
upper levels, where verin had her chamberswere filled with shelves, and
the shelves filled with books, manuscripts, papers, scrolls, maps, and charts,
collected from every nation over the course of three thousand years. not even
the great libraries in tear and cairhien held so many.
the librariansbrown sisters allguarded those shelves, and guarded the
doors as closely, to make sure not a scrap of paper left unless they knew who
took it and why. but it was not to one of the guarded entrances that nynaeve
led egwene and elayne.
around the foundations of the library, lying flat to the ground in the shade


 of tall pecan trees, were other doors, both large and small. laborers
sometimes needed access to the storerooms beneath, and the librarians did not
approve of sweating men tracking through their preserve. nynaeve pulled up
one of those, no bigger than the front door of a farmhouse, and motioned the
others down a steep flight of stairs descending into darkness. when she let it
down behind them, all light vanished.
egwene opened herself to saidarit came so smoothly that she barely
realized what she was doingand channeled a trickle of the power that
flooded through her. for a moment the mere feel of that rush surging within
her threatened to overwhelm other sensations. a small ball of bluishwhite
light appeared, balanced in the air above her hand. she took a deep breath and
reminded herself of why she was walking stiffly. it was a link to the rest of
the world. the feel of her linen shift against her skin returned, of woolen
stockings, and her dress. with a small pang of regret, she banished the desire
to pull in more, to let saidar absorb her.
elayne made a glowing sphere for herself at the same time, and the pair
provided more light than two lanterns would have. it feels sowonderful,
doesnt it? she murmured.
be careful, egwene said.
i am. elayne sighed. it just feels. . . . i will be careful.
this way, nynaeve told them sharply and brushed by to lead them down.
she did not go too far ahead. she was not angry, and had to use the light the
other two provided.
the dusty side corridor by which they had entered, lined with wooden
doors set in gray stone walls, took nearly a hundred paces to reach the much
wider main hall that ran the length of the library. their lights showed
footprints overlaying footprints in the dust, most from the large boots men
would wear and most themselves faded by dust. the ceiling was higher here,
and some of the doors nearly large enough for a barn. the main stairs at the
end, half the width of the hall, were where large things were brought down.
another flight beside them led deeper. nynaeve took it without a pause.
egwene followed quickly. the bluish light washed out elaynes face, but
egwene thought it still looked paler than it should. we could scream our lungs
out down here, and no one would hear a whimper.
she felt a lightning bolt form, or the potential for one, and nearly stumbled.
she had never before channeled two flows at once; it did not seem difficult at
all.


 the main hall of the second basement was much like the first level, wide
and dusty but with a lower ceiling. nynaeve hurried to the third door on the
right and stopped.
the door was not large, but its rough wooden planks somehow gave an
impression of thickness. a round iron lock hung from a length of stout chain
that was drawn tight through two thick staples, one in the door, the other
cemented into the wall. lock and chain alike had the look of newness; there
was almost no dust on them.
a lock! nynaeve jerked at it; the chain had no give, and neither did the
lock. did either of you see a lock anywhere else? she pulled it again, then
flung it against the door hard enough to bounce. the bang echoed down the
hall. i did not see one other locked door! she pounded a fist on the rough
wood. not one!
calm yourself, elayne said. there is no need to throw a tantrum. i could
open the lock myself, if i could see how the inside of it works. we will open it
some way.
i do not want to calm myself, nynaeve snapped. i want to be furious! i
want . . . !
letting the rest of the tirade fade from her awareness, egwene touched the
chain. she had learned more things than how to make lightning bolts since
leaving tar valon. one was an affinity for metal. that came from earth, one
of the five powers few women had much strength inthe other was fire
but she had it, and she could feel the chain, feel inside the chain, feel the
tiniest bits of the cold metal, the patterns they made. the power within her
quivered in time to the vibrations of those patterns.
move out of my way, egwene.
she looked around and saw nynaeve wrapped in the glow of saidar and
holding a prybar so close in color to the bluewhite of the light that it was
nearly invisible. nynaeve frowned at the chain, muttered something about
leverage, and the prybar was suddenly twice as long.
move, egwene.
egwene moved.
thrusting the end of the prybar through the chain, nynaeve braced it, then
heaved with all her strength. the chain snapped like thread, nynaeve gasped
and stumbled halfway across the hall in surprise, and the prybar clattered to
the floor. straightening, nynaeve stared from the bar to the chain in


 amazement. the prybar vanished.
i think i did something to the chain, egwene said. and i wish i knew
what.
you could have said something, nynaeve muttered. she pulled the rest of
the chain from the staples and threw open the door. well? are you going to
stand there all day?
the dusty room inside was perhaps ten paces square, but it held only a heap
of large bags made of heavy brown cloth, each stuffed full, tagged, and sealed
with the flame of tar valon. egwene did not have to count them to know
there were thirteen.
she moved her ball of light to the wall and fastened it there; she was not
certain how she did it, but when she took her hand away, the light remained. i
keep learning how to do things without knowing what they are, she thought
nervously.
elayne frowned at her as if considering, then hung her light on the wall,
too. watching, egwene thought she saw what it was she had done. she
learned it from me, but i just learned it from her. she shivered.
nynaeve went straight to tumbling the bags apart and reading the tags.
rianna. joiya byir. these are what we are after. she examined the seal on
one bag, then broke the wax and unwound the binding cords. at least we
know no ones been here before us.
egwene chose a bag and broke the seal without reading the name on the
tag. she did not really want to know whose possessions she was searching.
when she upended them onto the dusty floor, they proved to be mainly old
clothes and shoes, with a few ripped and crumpled papers of the sort that
might hide under the wardrobe of a woman who was not too assiduous in
seeing her rooms cleaned. i dont see anything useful here. a cloak that
would not do for rags. a torn half of a map of some city. tear, it says in the
corner. three stockings that need darning. she stuck her finger through the
hole in a velvet slipper that had no mate and waggled it at the others. this
one left no clues behind.
amico did not leave anything, either, elayne said glumly, tossing clothes
aside with both hands. it might as well be rags. wait, heres a book. whoever
bundled these up must have been in a hurry to toss in a book. customs and
ceremonies of the tairen court. the cover is torn off, but the librarians will
want it anyway. the librarians certainly would. no one threw away books,
no matter how badly damaged.


 tear, nynaeve said in a flat voice. kneeling amid the clutter from the bag
she was searching, she retrieved a scrap of paper she had already thrown
away. a list of trading ships on the erinin, with the dates they sailed from
tar valon and the dates they were expected to arrive in tear.
it could be coincidence, egwene said slowly.
perhaps, nynaeve said. she folded the paper and tucked it up her sleeve,
then broke the seal on another bag.
when they finally finished, every bag searched twice and discarded rubbish
heaped around the edges of the room, egwene sat down on one of the empty
bags, so engrossed that she barely noticed her own wince. drawing up her
knees, she studied the little collection they had made, all laid in a row.
it is too much, elayne said. there is too much of it.
too much, nynaeve agreed.
there was a second book, a tattered, leatherbound volume entitled
observations on a visit to tear, with half its pages falling out. caught in the
lining of a badly torn cloak in chesmal emrys bag, where it might have
slipped through a rip in one of the pockets of the cloak, had been another list
of trading vessels. it said no more than the names, but they were all on the
other list, too, and according to that, those vessels all had sailed in the early
morning after the night liandrin and the others left the tower. there was a
hastily sketched plan of some large building, with one room faintly noted as
heart of the stone, and a page with the names of five inns, the word tear
heading the page badly smudged but barely readable. there was. . . .
theres something from everyone, egwene muttered. every one of them
left something pointing to a journey to tear. how could anyone miss seeing it,
if they looked? why did the amyrlin say nothing of this?
the amyrlin, nynaeve said bitterly, keeps her own counsel, and what
matter if we burn for it! she drew a deep breath, and sneezed from the dust
they had stirred up. what worries me is that i am looking at bait.
bait? egwene said. but she saw it as soon as she spoke.
nynaeve nodded. bait. a trap. or maybe a diversion. but trap or
diversion, its so obvious no one could be taken in by it.
unless they do not care whether whoever found this saw the trap or not.
uncertainty tinged elaynes voice. or perhaps they meant it to be so obvious
that whoever found it would dismiss tear immediately.


 egwene wished she could not believe that the black ajah could be as sure
of themselves as that. she realized she was gripping her pouch in her fingers,
running her thumb along the twisted curve of the stone ring inside. perhaps
they meant to taunt whoever found it, she said softly. perhaps they thought
whoever found this would rush headlong after them, in anger and pride. did
they know we would find it? do they see us that way?
burn me! nynaeve growled. it was a shock; nynaeve never used such
language.
for a time they simply stared in silence at the array.
what do we do now? elayne asked finally.
egwene squeezed the ring hard. dreaming was closely linked to
foretelling; the future, and events in other places, could appear in a
dreamers dreams. maybe we will know after tonight.
nynaeve looked at her, silent and expressionless, then chose out a dark
skirt that seemed not to have too many holes and rips, and began bundling in
it the things they had found. for now, she said, we will take this back to
my room and hide it. i think we just have time, if we dont want to be late to
the kitchens.
late, egwene thought. the longer she held the ring through her pouch, the
greater the urgency she felt. were already a step behind, but maybe we wont
be too late.


 c h a p t e r
2 7


telaranrhiod


the room egwene had been given, on the same gallery with nynaeve and
elayne, was little different from nynaeves. her bed was a trifle wider, her
table a little smaller. her bit of rug had flowers instead of scrolls. that was
all. after the novices quarters, it seemed like a room in a palace, but when
the three of them gathered there late that night, egwene wished she were back
on the novice galleries, with no ring on her finger and no bands on her dress.
the others looked as nervous as she felt.
they had worked in the kitchens for two more meals, and in between tried
to puzzle out the meaning of what they had found in the storeroom. was it a
trap, or an attempt to divert the search? did the amyrlin know of the things,
and if she did, why had she not mentioned them? talking provided no
answers, and the amyrlin never appeared so they could ask her.
verin had come into the kitchens after the midday meal, blinking as if she
were not sure why she was there. when she saw egwene and the other two on
their knees among the cauldrons and kettles, she looked surprised for a
moment, then walked over and asked, loud enough for anyone to hear, have
you found anything?
elayne, with her head and shoulders inside a huge soup kettle, banged her
head on the rim backing out. her blue eyes seemed to take up her entire face.
nothing but grease and sweat, aes sedai, nynaeve said. the tug she
gave her braid left a smear of greasy soap suds on her dark hair, and she
grimaced.
verin nodded as if that were the answer she had been seeking. well, keep
looking. she peered around the kitchen again, frowning as though puzzled to


 find herself there, and left.
alanna came to the kitchens after midday, too, collecting a bowl of big
green gooseberries and a pitcher of wine, and elaida, then sheriam, appeared
after supper, and anaiya, too.
alanna had asked egwene if she wanted to know more of the green ajah,
inquired when they were going to get on with their studies. just because the
accepted chose their own lessons and pace did not mean they were not
supposed to do any at all. the first few weeks would be bad, of course, but
they had to choose, or the choosing would be done for them.
elaida merely stood for a time, sternfaced and staring at them, hands on
her hips, and sheriam did the same in almost the identical pose. anaiya stood
the same way, but her look was more concerned. until she saw them glancing
at her. then her face became a match for elaidas and sheriams before her.
none of those visits meant anything that egwene could see. the mistress
of novices certainly had reason to check on them, as well as on the novices
working in the kitchens, and elaida had reason to keep an eye on the
daughterheir of andor. egwene tried not to think of the aes sedais interest
in rand. as for alanna, she was not the only aes sedai who came for a tray
to take back to her rooms rather than eat with the others. half the sisters in the
tower were too busy for meals, too busy to take the time to summon a servant
to fetch a tray. and anaiya . . . ? anaiya could well be concerned for her
dreamer. not that she would do anything to ease a punishment set by the
amyrlin seat herself. that could have been anaiyas reason for coming. it
could have been.
hanging her dress in the wardrobe, egwene told herself once again that
even verins slip could have been perfectly ordinary; the brown sister was
often absentminded. if it was a slip. sitting on the edge of her bed, she pulled
up her shift and began rolling down her stockings. she was almost beginning
to dislike white as much as she did gray.
nynaeve stood in front of the fireplace with egwenes pouch in one hand,
tugging her braid. elayne sat by the table, making nervous conversation.
green ajah, the goldenhaired woman said for what egwene thought
must be the twentieth time since midday. i might choose green ajah myself,
egwene. then i can have three or four warders, perhaps marry one of them.
who better for prince consort of andor than a warder? unless it is. . . . she
trailed off, blushing.
egwene felt a pang of jealousy she thought she had put down long ago, and


 sympathy mixed with it. light, how can i be jealous when i cannot look at
galad without shivering and feeling as if i am melting, both at the same time?
rand was mine, but no more. i wish i could give him to you, elayne, but he is
not for either of us, i think. it may be all well and good for the daughterheir
to marry a commoner, as long as hes an andorman, but not to marry the
dragon reborn. she let the stockings fall on the floor, telling herself there
were more important things to worry about tonight than neatness. i am ready,
nynaeve.
nynaeve handed her the pouch, and a long, thin strip of leather. perhaps it
will work for more than one at once. i could . . . go with you, perhaps.
emptying the stone ring onto her palm, egwene threaded the leather strip
through it, then tied it around her neck. the stripes and flecks of blue and
brown and red seemed more vivid against the white of her shift. and leave
elayne to watch over the both of us alone? when the black ajah may know
us?
i can do it, elayne said stoutly. or let me go with you, and nynaeve can
keep guard. she is the strongest of us, when shes angry, and if there is need
for a guard, you can be sure she will be.
egwene shook her head. what if it wont work for two? what if two of us
trying makes it not work at all? we would not even know till we woke up, and
then weve wasted the night. we cannot waste even one if we are to catch up.
were too far behind them already. they were valid reasons, and she
believed them, but there was another, closer to her heart. besides, ill feel
better knowing both of you are watching over me, in case. . . .
she did not want to say it. in case someone came while she was asleep. the
gray men. the black ajah. any one of the things that had turned the white
tower from a place of safety to a dark woods full of pits and snares.
something coming in while she lay there helpless. their faces showed they
understood.
as she stretched herself out on the bed and plumped a feather pillow
behind her head, elayne moved the chairs, one to either side of the bed.
nynaeve snuffed the candles one by one, then, in the dark, sat in one of the
chairs. elayne took the other.
egwene closed her eyes and tried to think sleepy thoughts, but she was too
conscious of the thing lying between her breasts. far more conscious than of
any soreness remaining from her visit to sheriams study. the ring seemed to
weigh as much as a brick, now, and thoughts of home and quiet pools of water


 all slid apart with remembrance of it. of telaranrhiod. the unseen world.
the world of dreams. waiting just the other side of sleep.
nynaeve began to hum softly. egwene recognized a nameless, wordless
tune her mother used to hum to her when she was little. when she was lying
in bed, in her own room, with a fluffy pillow, and warm blankets, and the
mingled smells of rose oil and baking from her mother, and. . . . rand, are
you all right? perrin? who was she? sleep came.
she stood among rolling hills quilted with wildflowers and dotted with small
thickets of leafy trees in the hollows and on the crests. butterflies floated
above the blossoms, wings flashing yellow and blue and green, and two larks
sang to each other nearby. just enough fluffy white clouds drifted in a soft
blue sky, and the breeze held that delicate balance between cool and warm
that came only a few special days in spring. it was a day too perfect to be
anything but a dream.
she looked at her dress, and laughed delightedly. exactly her favorite shade
of skyblue silk, slashed with white in the skirtthat changed to green as she
frowned momentarilysewn with rows of tiny pearls down the sleeves and
across the bosom. she stuck out a foot just to peek at the toe of a velvet
slipper. the only jarring note was the twisted ring of multicolored stone
hanging around her neck on a leather cord.
she took the ring in her hand and gasped. it felt as light as a feather. if she
tossed it up, she was sure it would drift away like thistledown. somehow, she
did not feel afraid of it any longer. she tucked it inside the neck of her dress
to get it out of the way.
so this is verins telaranrhiod, she said. corianin nedeals world of
dreams. it does not look dangerous to me. but verin had said it was. black
ajah or not, egwene did not see how any aes sedai could tell a lie right out.
she could be mistaken. but she did not believe verin was.
just to see if she could, she opened herself to the one power. saidar filled
her. even here, it was present. she channeled the flow lightly, delicately,
directed it into the breeze, swirling butterflies into fluttering spirals of color,
into circles linked with circles.
abruptly she let it go. the butterflies settled back, unconcerned by their
brief adventure. myrddraal and some other shadowspawn could sense
someone channeling. looking around, she could not imagine such things in
that place, but just because she could not imagine them did not mean they


 were not there. and the black ajah had all those terangreal studied by
corianin nedeal. it was a sickening reminder of why she was there.
at least i know i can channel, she muttered. im not learning anything
standing here. perhaps if i look around. . . . she took a step . . .
. . . and was standing in the dank, dark hallway of an inn. she was an
innkeepers daughter; she was sure it was an inn. there was not a sound, and
all the doors along the hall were shut tight. just as she wondered who was
behind the plain wooden door in front of her, it swung silently open.
the room within was bare, and cold wind moaned through open windows,
stirring old ash on the hearth. a big dog lay curled up on the floor, shaggy tail
across its nose, between the door and a thick pillar of roughcut, black stone
that stood in the middle of the floor. a large, shaggyhaired young man sat
leaning back against the pillar in only his smallclothes, head lolling as if
asleep. a massive black chain ran around the pillar and across his chest, the
ends gripped in his clenched hands. asleep or not, his heavy muscles strained
to hold that chain tight, to prison himself against the pillar.
perrin? she said wonderingly. she stepped into the room. perrin, whats
the matter with you? perrin! the dog uncurled itself and stood.
it was not a dog, but a wolf, all black and gray, lips curling back from
glistening white teeth, yellow eyes regarding her as they might have a mouse.
a mouse it meant to eat.
egwene stepped back hastily into the hall in spite of herself. perrin! wake
up! theres a wolf! verin had said what happened here was real, and showed
the scar to prove it. the wolfs teeth looked as big as knives. perrin, wake
up! tell it im a friend! she embraced saidar. the wolf stalked nearer.
perrins head came up; his eyes opened drowsily. two sets of yellow eyes
regarded her. the wolf gathered himself. hopper, perrin shouted, no!
egwene!
the door swung shut before her face, and total darkness enveloped her.
she could not see, but she felt sweat beading on her forehead. not from
heat. light, where am i? i dont like this place. i want to wake up!
a whirring sound, and she jumped before she recognized a cricket. a frog
gave a bass croak in the darkness, and a chorus answered it. as her eyes
adapted, she dimly made out trees all around her. clouds blanketed the stars,
and the moon was a thin sliver.


 off to her right through the woods was another glow, flickering. a
campfire.
she considered a moment before moving. wanting to wake up had not been
enough to take her way from telaranrhiod, and she still had not found out
anything useful. and she had not been hurt in any way. so far, she thought,
shivering. but she had no idea whoor whatwas at that campfire. it could
be myrddraal. besides, im not dressed for running around in the forest. it
was the last thought that decided her; she prided herself on knowing when she
was being foolish.
taking a deep breath, she gathered up her silken skirts and crept closer. she
might not have nynaeves skill at woodcraft, but she knew enough to avoid
stepping on dead twigs. at last she peered carefully around the trunk of an old
oak at the campfire.
the only one there was a tall young man, sitting and staring into the
flames. rand. those flames did not burn wood. they did not burn anything
that she could see. the fire danced above a bare patch of ground. she did not
think they even scorched the soil.
before she could move, rand raised his head. she was surprised to see he
was smoking a pipe, a thin ribbon of tabac smoke lifting from the bowl. he
looked tired, so very tired.
whos out there? he demanded loudly. youve rustled enough leaves to
wake the dead, so you might as well show yourself.
egwenes lips compressed, but she stepped out. i did not! its me, rand.
do not be afraid. it is a dream. i must be in your dreams.
he was on his feet so suddenly that she stopped dead. he seemed in some
way larger than she remembered. and a touch dangerous. perhaps more than
a touch. his bluegray eyes seemed to burn like frozen fire.
do you think i dont know it is a dream? he sneered. i know that makes
it no less real. he stared angrily out into the darkness as if looking for
someone. how long will you try? he shouted at the night. how many faces
will you send? my mother, my father, now her! pretty girls wont tempt me
with a kiss, not even one i know! i deny you, father of lies! i deny you!
rand, she said uncertainly. its egwene. i am egwene.
there was a sword in his hands, suddenly, out of nowhere. its blade was
worked out of a single flame, slightly curved and graven with a heron. my
mother gave me honeycake, he said in a tight voice, with the smell of


 poison rank on it. my father had a knife for my ribs. sheshe offered kisses,
and more. sweat slicked his face; his stare seemed enough to set her afire.
what do you bring?
you are going to listen to me, rand althor, if i have to sit on you. she
gathered saidar, channeled the flows to make the air hold him in a net.
the sword spun in his hands, roaring like an open furnace.
she grunted and staggered; it felt as if a rope stretched too tight had broken
and snapped back into her.
rand laughed. i learn, you see. when it works. . . . he grimaced and
started toward her. i could stand any face but that one. not her face, burn
you! the sword flashed out.
egwene fled.
she was not sure what it was she did, or how, but she found herself back
among the rolling hills under a sunny sky, with larks singing and butterflies
playing. she drew a deep, shuddering breath.
ive learned. . . . what? that the dark one is still after rand? i knew that
already. that maybe the dark one wants to kill him? thats different. unless
maybe hes gone mad already, and does not know what he is saying. light,
why couldnt i help him? oh, light, rand!
she took another long breath to calm herself. the only way to help him is
to gentle him, she muttered. as well go ahead and kill him. her stomach
twisted and knotted. ill never do that. never!
a redbird had perched on a cloudberry bush nearby, crest lifting as it tilted
its head to watch her cautiously. she addressed the bird. well, i am not
helping anything standing here talking to myself, am i? or talking to you,
either.
the redbird took wing as she stepped toward the bush. it was still a flash of
crimson as she took the next step, vanished into a thicket as she took a third.
she stopped and fished the stone ring on its cord out of the front of her
dress. why was it not changing? everything had changed so fast up till now
that she could hardly catch her breath. why not now? unless there was some
answer right here? she looked around uncertainly. the wildflowers taunted
her, and the larksong mocked her. this place seemed too much of her own
making.
determined, she tightened her hand around the terangreal. take me


 where i need to be. she shut her eyes and concentrated on the ring. it was
stone, after all; earth should give her some feeling for it. do it. take me
where i need to be. once again she embraced saidar, fed a trickle of the one
power into the ring. she knew it did not need any flow of power directed at it
to work, and she did not try to do anything to it. only to give it more of the
power to use. take me to where i can find an answer. i need to know what
the black ajah wants. take me to the answer.
well, youve found your way at last, child. all sorts of answers here.
egwenes eyes snapped open. she stood in a great hall, its vast domed
ceiling supported by a forest of massive redstone columns. and hanging in
midair was a sword of crystal, gleaming and sparkling as it slowly revolved.
she was not certain, but she thought it might be the sword rand had been
reaching for in that dream. that other dream. this all felt so real, she had to
keep reminding herself it was a dream, too.
an old woman stepped out of the shadows of the column, bent and
hobbling with a stick. ugly did not begin to describe her. she had a bony,
pointed chin, an even bonier, sharper nose, and it seemed there were more
warts growing hairs on her face than there was face.
who are you? egwene said. the only people she had seen so far in
telaranrhiod were those she already knew, but she did not think she could
have forgotten this poor old woman.
just poor old silvie, my lady, the old woman cackled. at the same time
she managed a stoop that might have been meant for a curtsy, or possibly a
cringe. you know poor old silvie, my lady. served your family faithfully all
these years. does this old face still frighten you? dont let it, my lady. it
serves me, when i need it, as good as a prettier.
of course, it does, egwene said. its a strong face. a good face. she
hoped the woman believed it. whoever this silvie was, she seemed to think
she knew egwene. perhaps she knew answers, too. silvie, you said
something about finding answers here.
oh, youve come to the right place for answers, my lady. the heart of the
stone is full of answers. and secrets. the high lords would not be pleased to
see us here, my lady. oh, no. none but the high lords enter here. and
servants, of course. she gave a sly, screeching laugh. the high lords dont
sweep and mop. but who sees a servant?
what kind of secrets?


 but silvie was hobbling toward the crystal sword. plots, she said as if to
herself. all of them pretending to serve the great lord, and all the while
plotting and planning to regain what they lost. each one thinking he or she is
the only one plotting. ishamael is a fool!
what? egwene said sharply. what did you say about ishamael?
the old woman turned to present a crooked, ingratiating smile. just a
thing poor folks say, my lady. it turns the forsakens power, calling them
fools. makes you feel good, and safe. even the shadow cant take being
called a fool. try it, my lady. say, baalzamon is a fool!
egwenes lips twitched on the edge of a smile. baalzamon is a fool! you
are right, silvie. it actually did feel good, laughing at the dark one. the old
woman chuckled. the sword revolved just beyond her shoulder. silvie, what
is that?
callandor, my lady. you know that, dont you? the sword that cannot
be touched. abruptly she swung her stick behind her; a foot from the
sword, the stick stopped with a dull thwack and bounded back. silvie grinned
wider. the sword that is not a sword, though theres precious few knows
what it is. but none can touch it save one. they saw to that, who put it here.
the dragon reborn will hold callandor one day, and prove to the world hes
the dragon by doing it. the first proof, anyway. lews therin come back for
all the world to see, and grovel before. ah, the high lords dont like having it
here. they like nothing to do with the power. theyd rid themselves of it, if
they could. if they could. i suppose theres others would take it, if they could.
what wouldnt one of the forsaken give, to hold callandor?
egwene stared at the sparkling sword. if the prophecies of the dragon were
true, if rand was the dragon as moiraine claimed, he would wield it one day,
though from the rest of what she knew of the prophecies concerning
callandor, she could not see how it could ever come to be. but if theres a
way to take it, maybe the black ajah knows how. if they know it, i can figure it
out.
cautiously, she reached out with the power, probing at whatever held and
shielded the sword. her probe touchedsomethingand stopped. she could
sense which of the five powers had been used here. air, and fire, and spirit.
she could trace the intricate weave made by saidar, set with a strength that
amazed her. there were gaps in that weave, spaces where her probe should
slide through. when she tried, it was like fighting the strongest part of the
weave head on. it hit her then, what she was trying to force a way through,


 and she let her probe vanish. half that wall had been woven using saidar; the
other half, the part she could not sense or touch, had been made with saidin.
that was not it, exactlythe wall was all of one piecebut it was close
enough. a stone wall stops a blind woman as surely as one who can see it.
footsteps echoed in the distance. boots.
egwene could not tell how many there were, or from which direction they
were coming, but silvie gave a start and immediately stared off among the
columns. hes coming to stare at it again, she muttered. awake or asleep,
he wants. . . . she seemed to remember egwene, and put on a worried smile.
you must leave, now, my lady. he mustnt find you here, or even know
youve been.
egwene was already backing in among the columns, and silvie followed,
flapping her hands and waving her stick. i am going, silvie. i just have to
remember the way. she fingered the stone ring. take me back to the hills.
nothing happened. she channeled a hairlike flow to the ring. take me back
to the hills. the redstone columns still surrounded her. the boots were
closer, close enough not to be swallowed in their own echoes anymore.
you dont know the way out, sylvie said flatly, then went on in a near
whisper, ingratiating and mocking at once, an old retainer who felt she could
take liberties. oh, my lady, this is a dangerous place to come into, if you
dont know the way out. come, let poor old silvie take you out. poor old
silvie will tuck you safe in your bed, my lady. she wrapped both arms
around egwene, urging her further from the sword. not that egwene needed
much urging. the boots had stopped; hewhoever he waswas probably
gazing at callandor.
just show me the way, egwene whispered back. or tell me. theres no
need to push. the old womans fingers had somehow gotten tangled around
the stone ring. dont touch that, silvie.
safe in your bed.
pain annihilated the world.
with a throatwrenching shriek, egwene sat up in the dark, sweat rolling
down her face. for a moment she had no idea where she was, and did not
care. oh, light, she moaned, that hurt. oh, light, that hurt! she ran her
hands over herself, sure her skin must be scored or wealed to make such a
burning, but she could not find a mark.


 we are here, nynaeves voice said from the darkness. were here,
egwene.
egwene threw herself toward the voice and wrapped her arms around
nynaeves neck in sheer relief. oh, light, im back. light, im back.
elayne, nynaeve said.
in a few moments one of the candles was giving a small light. elayne
paused with the candle in hand and the spill she had lit with flint and steel in
the other. then she smiled, and every candle in the room burst into flame. she
stopped at the washstand and came back to the bed with a cool, damp cloth to
wash egwenes face.
was it bad? she asked worriedly. you never stirred. you never
mumbled. we did not know whether to wake you or not.
hurriedly, egwene fumbled the leather cord from around her neck and
hurled it and the stone ring across the room. next time, she panted, we
decide on a time, and you wake me after it. wake me if you have to stick my
head in a basin of water! she had not realized that she had decided there
would be a next time. would you put your head in a bears mouth just to show
you werent afraid? would you do it twice just because youd done it once and
didnt die?
yet it was more than a matter of proving to herself that she was not afraid.
she was afraid, and knew it. but so long as the black ajah had those
terangreal corianin had studied, she would have to keep going back. she
was sure the answer to why they wanted them lay in telaranrhiod. if she
could find answers about the black ajah thereperhaps other answers, too, if
half what she had been told about dreaming were trueshe had to go back.
but not tonight, she said softly. not yet.
what happened? nynaeve asked. what did you . . . dream?
egwene lay back on the bed and told them. of it all, the only thing she left
out was about perrin talking to the wolf. she left the wolf out altogether. she
felt a little guilty about keeping secrets from elayne and nynaeve, but it was
perrins secret to tell, when and if he chose, not hers. the rest she gave them
word for word, describing everything. when she was done, she felt emptied.
aside from being tired, elayne said, did he look hurt? egwene, i cannot
believe he would ever hurt you. i cannot believe he would.
rand, nynaeve said dryly, will have to look after himself awhile
longer. elayne blushed; she looked pretty doing it. egwene realized that


 elayne looked pretty doing anything, even crying, or scrubbing pots.
callandor, nynaeve continued. the heart of the stone. that was marked
on the plan. i think we know where the black ajah is.
elayne had regained her poise. it does not change the trap, she said. if it
is not a diversion, it is a trap.
nynaeve smiled grimly. the best way to catch whoever set a trap is to
spring it and wait for him to come. or her, in this instance.
you mean go to tear? egwene said, and nynaeve nodded.
the amyrlin has cut us loose, it seems. we make our own decisions,
remember? at least we know the black ajah is in tear, and we know who to
look for there. here, all we can do is sit and stew in our own suspicions of
everybody, wonder if there is another gray man out there. i would rather be
the hound than the rabbit.
i have to write to my mother, elayne said. when she saw the looks they
gave her, her voice became defensive. i have already vanished once without
her knowing where i was. if i do it again. . . . you do not know mothers
temper. she could send gareth bryne and the whole army against tar valon.
or hunting after us.
you could stay here, egwene said.
no. i will not let you two go alone. and i wont stay here wondering if the
sister teaching me is a darkfriend, or if the next gray man will come after
me. she gave a small laugh. i will not work in the kitchens while you two
are off adventuring, either. i just have to tell my mother than i am out of the
tower on the amyrlins orders, so she wont become furious if she hears
rumors. i do not have to tell her where we are going, or why.
you surely had better not, nynaeve said. she very likely would come
after you if she knew about the black ajah. for that matter, you cant know
how many hands your letter will pass through before it reaches her, or what
eyes might read it. best not to say anything you dont mind anyone knowing.
thats another thing. elayne sighed. the amyrlin does not know i am
one of you. i have to find some way to send it with no chance of her seeing
it.
i will have to think on that. nynaeves brows furrowed. perhaps once
were on our way. you could leave it at aringill on the way downriver, if we
have time to find someone there going to caemlyn. a sight of one of those
papers the amyrlin gave us might convince somebody. we will have to hope


 they work on ship captains, too, unless one of you has more coin than i have.
elayne shook her head dolefully.
egwene did not even bother. what money they had possessed had all gone
on the journey from toman head, except for a few coppers each. when. . . .
she had to stop and clear her throat. when do we leave? tonight?
nynaeve looked as if she were considering it for a moment, but then she
shook her head. you need sleep, after. . . . her gesture took in the stone ring
lying where it had bounced off the wall. we will give the amyrlin one more
chance to seek us out. when we finish with breakfast, you both pack what
you want to take, but keep it light. we have to leave the tower without
anyone noticing, remember. if the amyrlin doesnt reach us by midday, i
mean to be on a trading ship, shoving that paper down the captains throat if
need be, before prime sounds. how does that sound to you two?
it sounds excellent, elayne said firmly, and egwene said, tonight or
tomorrow, the sooner the better, as far as i can see. she wished she sounded
as confident as elayne.
then we had best get some sleep.
nynaeve, egwene said in a small voice, i. . . . i dont want to be alone
tonight. it pained her to make that admission.
i dont, either, elayne said. i keep thinking about the soulless. i do not
know why, but they frighten me even more than the black ajah.
i suppose, nynaeve said slowly, i dont really want to be alone, myself.
she eyed the bed where egwene lay. that looks big enough for three, if
everybody keeps her elbows to herself.
later, when they were shifting about trying to find a way to lie that did not
feel so crowded, nynaeve suddenly laughed.
what is it? egwene asked. you are not that ticklish.
i just thought of someone whod be happy to carry elaynes letter for her.
happy to leave tar valon, too. in fact, id bet on it.


 c h a p t e r
2 8


a way out


clad only in his breeches, mat was just finishing a snack after breakfast
some ham, three apples, bread, and butterwhen the door of his room
opened, and nynaeve, egwene, and elayne filed in, all smiling at him
brightly. he got up for a shirt, then stubbornly sat down again. they could at
least have knocked. in any case, it was good to see their faces. at first, it was.
well, you do look better, egwene said.
as if you had had a month of good food and rest, elayne said.
nynaeve pressed a hand to his forehead. he flinched before he recalled that
she had done much the same for at least five years, back home. she was just
the wisdom then, he thought. she wasnt wearing that ring.
she had noticed his flinch. she gave him a tight smile. you look ready to
be up and about, to me. are you tired of being cooped up, yet? you never
could stand two days in a row indoors.
he eyed the last apple core reluctantly, then dropped it back on the plate.
almost, he started to lick the juice off his fingers, but they were all three
looking at him. and still smiling. he realized he was trying to decide which
of them was prettiest, and could not. had they been anybody but whoand
whatthey were, he would have asked any and all of them to dance a jig or a
reel. he had danced with egwene often enough, back home, and even once
with nynaeve, but that seemed a long time ago.
 one pretty woman means fun at the dance. two pretty women mean
trouble in the house. three pretty women mean run for the hills.  he gave
nynaeve an even tighter smile than her own. my da used to say that. youre
up to something, nynaeve. you are all smiling like cats staring at a finch


 caught in a thornbush, and i think i am the finch.
the smiles flickered and vanished. he noticed their hands and wondered
why they all looked as if they had been washing dishes. the daughterheir of
andor surely never washed a dish, and he had as hard a time imagining
nynaeve at it, even knowing she had done her own back in emonds field.
they all three wore great serpent rings, now. that was new. and not a
particularly pleasant surprise. light, it had to happen sometime. its none of
my business, and that is all there is to it. none of my business. it just isnt.
egwene shook her head, but it seemed as much for the other two women as
for him. i told you we should ask him straight out. hes stubborn as any
mule when he wants to be, and tricksome as a cat. you are, mat. you know it,
so stop frowning.
he put his grin back quickly.
hush, egwene, nynaeve said. mat, just because we want to ask you a
favor does not mean we dont care how you feel. we do care, and you know
that, unless youre being even more woolheaded than usual. are you well?
you look remarkably well compared to how i last saw you. it really does look
more like a month than two days.
im ready to run ten miles and dance a jig at the end of it. his stomach
growled, reminding him how long it was to midday yet, but he ignored it, and
hoped they had not noticed. he almost did feel as if he had had a month of
rest and food. and had had one meal in the last day. what favor? he asked
suspiciously. nynaeve did not ask favors, in his recollection; nynaeve told
people what to do and expected to see it done.
i want you to carry a letter for me, elayne said before nynaeve could
speak. to my mother, in caemlyn. she smiled, making a dimple in her
cheek. i would appreciate it so very much, mat. the morning light through
the windows seemed to pick out highlights in her hair.
i wonder if she likes to dance. he pushed the thought right out of his head.
that does not sound too very hard, but its a long trip. what do i get out of
it? from the look on her face, he did not think that dimple had failed her
very often.
she drew herself up, slim and proud. he could almost see a throne behind
her. are you a loyal subject of andor? do you not wish to serve the lion
throne, and your daughterheir?
mat snickered.


 i told you that would not work either, egwene said. not with him.
elayne had a wry twist to her mouth. i thought it worth a try. it always
works on the guards, in caemlyn. you said if i smiled she cut off short,
very obviously not looking at him.
what did you say, egwene, he thought, furious. that im a fool for any girl
who smiles at me? he kept his outward calm, though, and managed to
maintain his grin.
i wish asking were enough, egwene said, but you do not do favors, do
you, mat? have you ever done anything without being coaxed, wheedled, or
bullied?
he only smiled at her. i will dance with both of you, egwene, but i wont
run errands. for an instant he thought she was going to stick out her tongue
at him.
if we can go back to what we planned in the first place, nynaeve said in
a toocalm voice. the other two nodded, and she turned her attentions on him.
for the first time since coming in, she looked like the wisdom of old, with a
stare that could pin you in your tracks and her braid ready to lash like a cats
tail.
you are even ruder than i remembered, matrim cauthon. with you sick so
longand egwene, and elayne, and i taking care of you like a babe in
swaddlingi had almost forgotten. even so, i would think youd have a little
gratitude in you. youve talked about seeing the world, seeing great cities.
well, what better city than caemlyn? do what you want, show your gratitude,
and help someone all at the same time. she produced a folded parchment
from inside her cloak and set it on the table. it was sealed with a lily, in
golden yellow wax. you cannot ask for more than that.
he eyed the paper regretfully. he barely remembered passing through
caemlyn, once, with rand. it was a shame to stop them now, but he thought it
best. if you want the fun of the jig, you have to pay the harper sooner or later.
and the way nynaeve was now, the longer he kept from paying, the worse it
would be. nynaeve, i cant.
what do you mean, you cannot? are you a fly on the wall, or a man? a
chance to do a favor for the daughterheir of andor, to see caemlyn, to meet
queen morgase herself in all probability, and you cannot? i really do not
know what more you could possibly want. dont you skitter away like grease
on a griddle this time, matrim cauthon! or has your heart changed so you
like seeing these all around you? she waved her left hand in his face,


 practically hitting him in the nose with her ring.
please, mat? elayne said, and egwene was staring at him as if he had
grown horns like a trolloc.
he squirmed on his chair. it is not that i dont want to. i cannot! the
amyrlins made it so i cant get off the bloothe island. change that, and i
will carry your letter in my teeth, elayne.
looks passed between them. he sometimes wondered if women could read
each others minds. they certainly seemed to read his when he least wanted
it. but this time, whatever they had decided silently among themselves, they
had not read his thoughts.
explain, nynaeve said curtly. why would the amyrlin want to keep you
here?
he shrugged, and looked her straight in the eye, and gave her his best
rueful grin. its because i was sick. because it went on so long. she said she
would not let me go until she was sure i wouldnt go off somewhere and die.
not that im going to, of course. die, i mean.
nynaeve frowned, and jerked her braid, and suddenly took his head
between her hands; a chill ran through him. light, the power! before the
thought was done, she had released him.
what . . . ? what did you do to me, nynaeve?
not a tenth part of what you deserve, in all likelihood, she said. you are
as healthy as a bull. weaker than you look, but healthy.
i told you i was, he said uneasily. he tried to get his grin back.
nynaeve, she looked like you. the amyrlin, i mean. managing to loom even
if she is a foot too short for it, and bullying. . . . the way her eyebrows
climbed, he decided that was not a road to go down any further. as long as he
kept them away from the horn. he wondered if they knew. well. anyway, i
think they want to keep me here because of that dagger. i mean, until they
figure out exactly how it did what it did. you know how aes sedai are. he
gave a small laugh. they all just looked at him. maybe i shouldnt have said
that. burn me! they want to be bloody aes sedai. burn me, im going on too
long. i wish nynaeve would stop staring at me like that. keep it short. the
amyrlin made it so i cannot cross a bridge or board a ship without an order
from her. you see? its not that i do not want to help. i just cant.
but you will if we can get you out of tar valon? nynaeve said intently.


 you get me out of tar valon, and ill carry elayne to her mother on my
back.
elaynes eyebrows went up, this time, and egwene shook her head,
mouthing his name with a sharp look in her eyes. women had no sense of
humor, sometimes.
nynaeve motioned the two of them to follow her to the windows, where
they turned their backs to him and talked so softly he could catch only a
murmur. he thought he heard egwene say something about only needing one
if they stayed together. watching, he wondered if they really thought they
could get around the amyrlins order. if they can do that, i will carry their
bloody letter. i really will carry it in my teeth.
without thinking, he picked up an apple core and bit off the end. one chew,
and he hastily spit the mouthful of bitter seeds back onto the plate.
when they came back to the table, egwene handed him a thick, folded
paper. he eyed them suspiciously before opening it out. as he read, he began
humming to himself without knowing it.
what the bearer does is done at my order and by my authority. obey, and
keep silent, at my command.
siuan sanche
watcher of the seals
flame of tar valon
the amyrlin seat
and sealed at the bottom with the flame of tar valon in a circle of white
wax as hard as stone.
he realized he was humming a pocket full of gold and stopped. is this
real? you didnt . . . ? how did you get this?
she did not forge it, if that is what you mean, elayne said.
never you mind how we got it, nynaeve said. it is real. that is all that
need concern you. i would not show it around, were i you, or the amyrlin
will take it back, but it will get you past the guards and onto a ship. you said
youd take the letter, if we did that.
you can consider it in morgases hands right now. he did not want to
stop reading the paper, but he folded it back up anyway, and laid it on top of
elaynes letter. you wouldnt happen to have a little coin to go with this,
would you? some silver? a gold mark or two? i have almost enough for my


 passage, but i hear things are growing expensive downriver.
nynaeve shook her head. dont you have money? you gambled with
hurin almost every night until you grew too sick to hold the dice. why should
things be more expensive downriver?
we gambled for coppers, nynaeve, and he would not even do that after a
while. it doesnt matter. i will manage. dont you listen to what people say?
theres civil war in cairhien, and i hear it is bad in tear, too. ive heard a
room at an inn in aringill costs more than a good horse back home.
we have been busy, she said sharply, and exchanged worried looks with
egwene and elayne that set him wondering again.
it doesnt matter. i can make out. there had to be gaming in the inns near
the docks. a night with the dice would put him aboard a ship in the morning
with a full purse.
just you deliver that letter to queen morgase, mat, nynaeve said. and
do not let anyone know you have it.
ill take it to her. i said i would, didnt i? you would think i didnt keep
my promises. the looks he got from nynaeve and egwene reminded him of
a few he had not kept. i will do it. blood andi will do it!
they stayed awhile longer, talking of home for the most part. egwene and
elayne sat on the bed, and nynaeve took the armchair, while he kept his stool.
talk of emonds field made him homesick, and it seemed to make nynaeve
and egwene sad, as if they were speaking of something they would never see
again. he was sure their eyes moistened, but when he tried to change the
subject, they brought it back again, to people they knew, to the festivals of bel
tine and sunday, to harvest dances and picnic gatherings for the shearing.
elayne talked to him of caemlyn, of what to expect at the royal palace and
who to speak to, and a little of the city. sometimes she held herself in a way
that made him all but see a crown on her head. a man would have to be a fool
to let himself get involved with a woman like her. when they rose to leave, he
was sorry to see them go.
he stood, suddenly feeling awkward. look, you have done me a favor
here. he touched the amyrlins paper, on the table. a big favor. i know
youre all going to be aes sedaihe stumbled a little on thatand you
will be a queen one day, elayne, but if you ever need help, if there is ever
anything i can do, i will come. you can count on it. did i say something
funny?


 elayne had a hand over her mouth, and egwene was struggling openly with
a laugh. no, mat, nynaeve said smoothly, but her lips twitched. just
something i have observed about men.
you would have to be a woman to understand, elayne said.
journey well and safely, mat, egwene said. and remember, if a woman
does need a hero, she needs him today, not tomorrow. the laughter bubbled
out of her.
he stared at the door closing behind them. women, he decided for at least
the hundredth time, were odd.
then his eye fell on elaynes letter, and the folded paper lying atop it. the
amyrlins blessed, nottobeunderstood, but welcomeasafireinwinter
paper. he danced a little caper in the middle of the flowered carpet. caemlyn
to see, and a queen to meet. your own words will free me of you, amyrlin. and
get me away from selene, too.
youll never catch me, he laughed, and meant it for both of them. youll
never catch mat cauthon.


 c h a p t e r
2 9


a trap to spring


in a corner the spit dog was lying at its ease. glaring at it, nynaeve mopped
sweat from her forehead with her hand and leaned her back into doing the
work he should have done. id not have put it past them to shove me in his
wicker wheel instead of letting me turn this lightforsaken handle! aes sedai!
burn them all! it was a measure of her upset that she used such language, and
another that she did not even notice she had done it. she did not think the fire
in the long, gray stone fireplace would seem any hotter if she crawled into it.
she was sure the brindle dog was grinning at her.
elayne was skimming grease out of the dripping pan under the roasts with a
longhandled wooden spoon, while egwene used its twin to baste the meat.
the great kitchen went on about its midday routine around them. even the
novices had grown so used to seeing accepted there that they hardly even
glanced at the three women. not that the cooks allowed the novices to dawdle
for gawking. work built character, so the aes sedai said, and the cooks saw to
it that the novices built strong character. and the three accepted, too.
laras, the mistress of the kitchensshe was really the chief cook, but so
many had used the other for so long that it might as well have been her title
came over to examine the roasts. and the women sweating over them. she
was more than merely stout, with layers of chins, and a spotless white apron
that could have made three novice dresses. she carried her own longhandled
wooden spoon like a scepter. it was not for stirring, that spoon. it was for
directing those under her, and smacking those who were not building
character quickly enough to suit her. she studied the roasts, sniffed
disparagingly, and turned her frown on the three accepted.
nynaeve met laras look with a level look of her own and kept turning the


 spit. the massive womans face never altered. nynaeve had tried smiling, but
that did nothing to change laras expression. stopping work to speak to her,
quite civilly, had been a disaster. it was bad enough being bullied and chivied
by aes sedai. she had to put up with that, however much it rankled and
burned, if she was to learn how to use her abilities. not that she liked what
she could doit was one thing to know aes sedai were not darkfriends for
channeling the power, but quite another to know she herself could channel
yet she had to learn if she was to get back at moiraine; hating moiraine for
what she had done to egwene and the other emonds fielders, pulling their
lives apart and manipulating them all for aes sedai purposes, was nearly all
that kept her going. but to be treated as a lazy, nonetoobright child by this
laras, to be forced to curtsy and scurry for this woman she could have put in
her place with a few wellchosen words back homethat made her grind her
teeth almost as much as did the thought of moiraine. maybe if i just do not
look at her. . . . no! i will be burned if ill drop my eyes before this . . . this
cow!
laras sniffed more loudly and walked away. she rolled from side to side as
she crossed the freshly mopped gray tiles.
still bending with spoon and greasepot, elayne glowered after her. if that
woman strikes me but once more, i shall have gareth bryne arrest her and
be quiet, egwene whispered. she did not stop basting the roasts, and she
never looked at elayne. she has ears like a
laras turned back as if she had indeed heard, her frown deepening, and her
mouth opened wide. before a sound emerged, the amyrlin seat entered the
kitchen like a whirlwind. even the striped stole on her shoulders seemed to
bristle. for once, leane was nowhere to be seen.
at last, nynaeve thought grimly. and not beforetime, either!
but the amyrlin did not glance her way. the amyrlin did not say a word to
anyone. running her hand across a tabletop scrubbed bonewhite, she looked
at her fingers and grimaced as if at filth. laras was at her side in an instant, all
smiles, but the amyrlins flat stare made her swallow them in silence.
the amyrlin stalked about the kitchen. she stared at the women slicing
oatcake. she glared at the women peeling vegetables. she sneered into the
soup kettles, then at the women tending them; the women became engrossed
in studying the surface of the soup. her frown set the girls carrying plates and
bowls out to the dining hall to a run. her glower put the novices darting like
mice sighting a cat. by the time she had made her way half around the


 kitchen, every woman there was working twice as fast as she had been. by the
time she completed her circuit, laras was the only one even daring to glance
at her.
the amyrlin stopped in front of the roasting spit, fists on her hips, and
looked at laras. she only looked, expressionless, blue eyes cold and hard.
the large woman gulped, and her chins wobbled as she smoothed her
apron. the amyrlin did not blink. laras eyes dropped, and she shifted
heavily from foot to foot. if the mother will pardon me, she said in a faint
voice. making something that might have been meant for a curtsy, she rushed
away, so forgetting herself that she joined the women at one of the soup
kettles and began stirring with her own spoon.
nynaeve smiled, keeping her head down to hide it. egwene and elayne
kept working, too, but they also kept glancing at the amyrlin, standing with
her back to them not two paces away.
the amyrlin was spreading her stare across the entire kitchen from where
she stood. if they are this easily cowed, she muttered softly, perhaps they
really have been getting away with too much for too long.
easily cowed indeed, nynaeve thought. pitiful excuses for women. all she
did was look at them! the amyrlin glanced over a stolecovered shoulder,
caught her eye for an instant. suddenly nynaeve realized she was turning the
spit faster. she told herself she had to pretend to be cowed like everyone else.
the amyrlins gaze fell on elayne, and abruptly she spoke, nearly loud
enough to rattle the copper pots and pans hanging on the walls. there are
some words i will not tolerate in a young womans mouth, elayne of house
trakand. if you let them in, i will see them scrubbed out! everyone in the
kitchen jumped.
elayne looked confused, and indignation crept across egwenes face.
nynaeve shook her head, small frantic shakes. no, girl! hold your tongue!
dont you see what she is doing?
but egwene did open her mouth, with a respectful if determined, mother,
she did not
silence! the amyrlins roar produced another ripple of jumps. laras!
can you find something to teach two girls to speak when they should and say
what they should, mistress of the kitchens? can you manage that?
laras came waddling faster than nynaeve had ever seen the woman move


 before, darting at elayne and egwene to seize an ear of each, all the while
repeating, yes, mother. immediately, mother. as you command, mother.
she hurried the two young women out of the kitchen as if eager to escape the
amyrlins stare.
the amyrlin was now close enough to nynaeve to touch her, but still
looking over the kitchen. a young cook, turning with a mixing bowl in her
hands, chanced to catch the amyrlins eye. she gave a great squeak as she
scuttled away across the floor.
i did not mean for egwene to be caught in that. the amyrlin barely
moved her lips. it looked as if she were muttering to herself, and from the
expression on her face, no one in the kitchen wanted to hear what she was
saying. nynaeve could just make out the words. but perhaps it will teach her
to think before she speaks.
nynaeve turned the spit and kept her head down, trying to look as if she
were also muttering under her breath if anyone looked. i thought you were
going to keep a close eye on us, mother. so we could report what we find.
if i come stare at you every day, daughter, some would grow suspicious.
the amyrlin kept up her study of the kitchen. most of the women seemed to
be avoiding even looking in her direction for fear of incurring her wrath. i
planned to have you brought to my study after the midday meal. to scold you
for not choosing your studies, so i implied to leane. but there is news that
could not wait. sheriam found another gray man. a woman. dead as last
weeks fish, and not a mark on her. she was laid out as if resting, right in the
middle of sheriams bed. not very pleasant for sheriam.
nynaeve stiffened, and the spit halted for a moment before she put it back
to revolving. sheriam had a chance to see the lists verin gave to egwene. so
did elaida. i make no accusations, but they had the chance. and egwene said
alanna . . . behaved oddly, too.
she told you of that, did she? alanna is arafellin. they have strange ideas
about honor and debts in arafel. she shrugged dismissively, but said, i
suppose i can keep an eye on her. have you learned anything useful yet,
child?
some, nynaeve muttered grimly. what about keeping an eye on
sheriam? maybe she didnt just find that gray man. the amyrlin could watch
elaida, too, for that matter. so alanna really did. . . . i do not understand
why you trust else grinwell, but your message was helpful.
in short, quick sentences, nynaeve told of the things they had found in the


 storeroom under the library, making it seem only she and egwene had gone,
and added the conclusions they had reached concerning them. she did not
mention egwenes dreamor whatever it had been; egwene insisted it had
been realof telaranrhiod. nor did she speak of the terangreal verin had
given egwene. she could not make herself entirely trust the woman wearing
the sevenstriped stoleor any woman who could wear the shawl, for that
matterand it seemed best to keep some things in reserve.
when she was done, the amyrlin was silent so long that nynaeve began to
think the woman had not heard. she was about to repeat herself, a little
louder, when the amyrlin finally spoke, still hardly moving her lips.
i sent no message, daughter. the things liandrin and the others left were
searched thoroughly, and burned after nothing was found. no one would use
black ajah leavings. as for else grinwell. . . . i remember the girl. she could
have learned, had she applied herself, but all she wanted was to smile at the
men at the warders practice yard. else grinwell was put on a trading vessel
and sent back to her mother ten days ago.
nynaeve tried to swallow the lump that had formed in her throat. the
amyrlins words made her think of bullies taunting smaller children. the
bullies were always so contemptuous of the littler children, always so sure the
small ones were too stupid to realize what was happening, that they made
little effort to disguise their snares. that the black ajah was so contemptuous
of her made her blood boil. that they could set this snare filled her stomach
with ice. light, if else was sent away. . . . light, anybody i talk to could be
liandrin, or any of the others. light!
the spit had stopped. hastily she started jt turning once more. no one
seemed to have noticed, though. they were all still doing their best not to
look at the amyrlin.
and what do you mean to do about this . . . soobvious trap? the amyrlin
said softly, still staring over the kitchen, away from nynaeve. do you mean
to fall into this one, too?
nynaeves face reddened. i know this trap for a trap. mother. and the best
way to catch whoever set a trap is to spring it and wait for himor herto
come. it sounded weaker than it had when she had said it to egwene and
elayne, after what the amyrlin had just told her, but she still meant it.
perhaps so, child. perhaps it is the way to find them. if they do not come
and find you held tightly in their net. she gave a vexed sigh. i will put gold
in your room for the journey. and i will let it be whispered about that i have


 sent you out to a farm to hoe cabbages. will elayne be going with you?
nynaeve forgot herself enough to stare at the amyrlin, then hurriedly put
her eyes back on her hands. her knuckles were white on the spit handle. you
scheming old. . . . why all the pretense, if you knew? your sly plots have had
us squirming nearly as much as the black ajah has. why? the amyrlins
face had tightened, enough to make her force a more respectful tone. if i
may ask, mother.
the amyrlin snorted. putting morgase back on the proper path whether
she wants to go or not will be hard enough without her thinking ive sent her
daughter to sea in a leaky skiff. this way i can say straight out that it was
none of my doing. it may be a bit hard on elayne, when she finally has to face
her mother, but i have three hounds, now, not two. i told you id have a
hundred if i could. she adjusted her stole on her shoulders. this has gone
on long enough. if i stay this close to you, it may be noticed. have you
anything more to tell me? or to ask? make it quick, daughter.
what is callandor, mother? nynaeve asked.
this time it was the amyrlin who forgot herself, half turning toward
nynaeve before jerking herself back. they cannot be allowed to have that.
her whisper was barely audible, as if meant for her own ears alone. they
cannot possibly take it, but. . . . she took a deep breath, and her soft words
firmed enough to be clear to nynaeve, if to no one two paces further away.
no more than a dozen women in the tower know what callandor is, and
perhaps as many outside. the high lords of tear know, but they never speak
of it except when a lord of the land is told on being raised. the sword that
cannot be touched is a saangreal, girl. only two more powerful were ever
made, and thank the light, neither of those was ever used. with callandor in
your hands, child, you could level a city at one blow. if you die keeping that
out of the black ajahs handsyou, and egwene, and elayne, all three
youll have done a service to the whole world, and cheap at the price.
how could they take it? nynaeve asked. i thought only the dragon
reborn could touch callandor.
the amyrlin gave her a sideways look sharp enough to carve the roasts on
the spit. they could be after something else, she said after a moment. they
stole terangreal here. the stone of tear holds nearly as many terangreal as
the tower.
i thought the high lords hated anything to do with the one power,
nynaeve whispered incredulously.


 oh, they do hate it, child. hate it, and fear it. when they find a tairen girl
who can channel, they bundle her onto a ship for tar valon before the day is
done, with hardly time to speak goodbyes to her family. the amyrlins
murmur was bitter with memory. yet they hold one of the most powerful
focuses of the power the world has ever seen, inside their precious stone. it is
my belief that is why they have collected so many terangrealand indeed,
anything to do with the powerover the years, as if by doing so they can
diminish the existence of the thing they cannot rid themselves of, the thing
that reminds them of their own doom every time they enter the heart of the
stone. their fortress that has broken a hundred armies will fall as one of the
signs the dragon is reborn. not even the only sign; just one. how that must
rankle their proud hearts. their downfall will not even be the one great sign of
the worlds change. they cannot even ignore it by staying out of the heart.
that is where lords of the land are raised to high lords, and where they
must perform what they call the rite of the guarding four times a year,
claiming that they guard the whole world against the dragon by holding
callandor. it must bite at their souls like a bellyful of live silverpike, and no
more than they deserve. she gave herself a shake, as if realizing she had said
far more than she had intended. is that all, child?
yes, mother, nynaeve said. light, it always comes back to rand, doesnt
it? always back to the dragon reborn. it was still an effort to think of him
that way. thats all.
the amyrlin shifted her stole again, frowning at the frenzied scurry in the
kitchen. ill have to set this aright. i needed to speak to you without delay,
but laras is a good woman, and she manages the kitchen and the larders
well.
nynaeve sniffed, and addressed her hands on the spit handle. laras is a
sour lump of lard, and too handy with that spoon by half. she thought she
had muttered it under her breath, but she heard the amyrlin chuckle wryly.
you are a fine judge of character, child. you must have done well as the
wisdom of your village. it was laras who went to sheriam and demanded to
know how long you three are to be kept to the dirtiest and hardest work,
without a turn at lighter. she said she would not be a party to breaking any
womans health or spirit, no matter what i said. a fine judge of character,
child.
laras came back into the kitchen doorway then, hesitating to enter her own
domain. the amyrlin went to meet her, smiles replacing her frowns and
stares.


 it all looks very well to me, laras. the amyrlins words came loud
enough for the entire kitchen to hear. i see nothing out of place, and
everything as it should be. you are to be commended. i think i will make
mistress of the kitchens a formal title.
the stout womans face fluttered from uneasiness to shock to beaming
pleasure. by the time the amyrlin swept out of the kitchen, laras was all
smiles. her frown returned, though, as she looked from the amyrlins
departing back to her workers. the kitchen seemed to leap into motion. laras
grim stare settled on nynaeve.
turning the spit again, nynaeve tried smiling at the big woman.
laras frown deepened, and she began tapping her spoon on her thigh,
apparently forgetting that for once it had been used for its intended purpose. it
left smears of soup on the white of her apron.
i will smile at her if if kills me, nynaeve thought, though she had to grit her
teeth to do it.
egwene and elayne appeared, twisting their faces and scrubbing their
mouths with their sleeves. at a stare from laras, they dashed to the spit and
resumed their labors.
soap, elayne muttered thickly, tastes horrid!
egwene trembled as she spooned juice from the dripping pan over the
roasts. nynaeve, if you tell me the amyrlin told us to stay here, i will
scream. i might run away for real.
we leave after the washing up is done, she told them, just as quickly as
we can fetch our belongings from our rooms. she wished she could share the
eagerness that flashed in their eyes. light send we arent walking into a trap
we cant get out of. light send it so.


 c h a p t e r
3 0


the first toss


after nynaeve and the others left him, mat spent most of the day in his
room, except for one brief excursion. he was planning. and eating. he ate
nearly everything the serving women brought him, and asked for more. they
were more than happy to oblige. it was bread and cheese and fruit he asked
for, and he piled winterwrinkled apples and pears, wedges of cheese and
loaves of bread inside the wardrobe, leaving empty trays for them to take
away.
at midday he had to endure a visit from an aes sedaianaiya, he seemed
to remember her name was. she put her hands on his head and sent cold chills
through him. it was the one power, he decided, not simply being touched by
an aes sedai. she was a plain woman despite her smooth cheeks and aes
sedai serenity.
you seem much better, she told him, smiling. her smile made him think
of his mother. even hungrier than i expected, so i hear, but better. i am
informed you are trying to eat the larders bare. believe me when i say we will
see you have all the food you need. you do not have to worry that well let
you miss a meal before you are fully well again.
he gave the grin he used on his mother when he especially wanted her to
believe him. i know you wont. and i do feel better. i thought i might see
some of the city this afternoon. if you have no objections, of course. maybe
visit an inn tonight. theres nothing like a night of commonroom talk to pick
ones spirits up.
he thought her lips twitched on the edge of a bigger smile. no one will try
to stop you, mat. but do not try to leave the city. it will only upset the guards,


 and bring you nothing but a trip back here under escort.
i would not do that, aes sedai. the amyrlin seat said id starve to death
in a few days if i left.
she nodded as if she did not believe a word he said. of course. as she
turned from him, her eyes fell on the quarterstaff he had brought from the
practice yard, propped in the corner of the room. you do not need to protect
yourself from us, mat. you are as safe here as you could be anywhere. almost
certainly safer.
oh, i know that, aes sedai. i do. after she left he frowned at the door,
wondering if he had managed to convince her of anything.
it was more evening than afternoon when he left the room for what he
hoped was the final time. the sky was purpling, and the setting sun painted
clouds to the west in shades of red. once he had his cloak around him, and the
big leather scrip he had found on his one earlier foray dangling from his
shoulder and bulging with the bread and cheese and fruit he had squirreled
away, one look in the mirror told him there was no hiding what he intended.
he tied the rest of his clothes up in a roll with the blanket from the bed and
slung that across his shoulders, too. the quarterstaff did for a walking staff.
he left nothing behind. his coat pockets held all his smaller belongings, and
his belt pouch held the most important. the amyrlin seats paper. elaynes
letter. and his dice cups.
he saw aes sedai as he made his way out of the tower, and some of them
noticed him, though most merely flickered an eyebrow, and none spoke to
him. anaiya was one. she gave him an amused smile and a rueful shake of
her head. he returned a shrug and the guiltiest grin he could manage, and she
went silently on, still shaking her head. the guards at the tower gates simply
looked at him.
it was not until he was across the big square and into the streets of the city
that relief finally surged up in him. and triumph. if you cant hide what you
are going to do, do it so everybody thinks you are a fool. then they stand
around waiting to see you fall on your face. those aes sedai will be waiting
for the guards to bring me back. when i do not return by morning, then theyll
start a search. not too frantic at first, because theyll think i have gone to
ground somewhere in the city. by the time they realize i havent, this rabbit
will be a long way downriver from the hounds.
with as light a heart as he could remember having in years, or so it seemed,
he began to hum were over the border again, heading toward the harbor


 where vessels would be sailing down to tear and all the villages along the
erinin between. he would not be going so far as that, of course. aringill,
where he would take to land again for the rest of the trip to caemlyn, was
only halfway downriver.
ill deliver your bloody letter. the nerve of her, thinking id say i would,
then not. i will deliver the bloody thing if it kills me.
twilight was beginning to cover tar valon, but there was still enough light
to grace the fantastical buildings, and the oddly shaped towers connected by
high bridges spanning open air over hundredpace drops. people yet filled the
streets, in so many different kinds of clothing that he thought every nation
must be represented. along the major avenues, pairs of lamplighters used
their ladders to light lanterns atop tall poles. but in the part of tar valon he
sought, the only light was what spilled from windows.
ogier had built the great buildings and towers of tar valon, but other,
newer parts had grown under the hands of men. newer meaning two thousand
years in some cases. down near south harbor, mens hands had tried to
match, if not duplicate, the fanciful ogier work. inns where ships crews
caroused bore enough stonework for palaces. statues in niches and cupolas on
rooftops, ornately worked cornices and intricately carved friezes, all
decorated chandlers shops and merchant houses. bridges arched across the
streets here, too, but the streets were cobblestone, not great paving blocks,
and many of the bridges were wood instead of stone, sometimes as low as the
second stories of the buildings they joined, and never higher than four.
the dark streets hummed with as much life as any in tar valon. traders off
their vessels and those who bought what the vessels carried, people who
traveled the river erinin and people who worked it, all filled the taverns and
the common rooms of the inns, in company with those who sought the money
such folk carried, by fair means or murky. raucous music filled the streets
from bittern and flute, harp and hammered dulcimer. the first inn mat entered
had three dice games in progress, men crouched in circles near the commonroom walls and shouting the wins and losses.
he only meant to gamble an hour or so before finding a ship, just long
enough to add a few coins to his purse, but he won. he had always won more
than he lost, as far as he could remember, and there had been times with
hurin, and in shienar, when six or eight tosses in a row won for him. tonight,
every toss won. every toss.
from the looks some of the men gave him, he was glad he had left his own


 dice in his pouch. those looks made him decide to move on. with surprise he
realized that he had nearly thirty silver marks in his purse now, but he had not
won so much from any one man that they would not all be glad to see him go.
except for one dark sailor with tight curlsone of the sea folk, someone
had said, though mat wondered what one of the athaan miere was doing so
far from the seawho followed him down the darkened street, arguing for a
chance to make good his losses. he wanted to reach the docksthirty silver
marks was more than enoughbut the sailor argued on, and he had only used
half his hour, so he gave in, and with the man entered the next tavern they
passed.
he won again, and it was as if a fever gripped him. he won every throw.
from tavern to inn to tavern he went, never staying long enough to anger
anyone with the amount of his winnings. and he still won every toss. he
exchanged silver for gold with a money changer. he played at crowns, and
fives, and maidens ruin. he played games with five dice, and with four, and
three, and even only two. he played games he did not know before he
squatted in the circle, or took a place at the table. and he won. somewhere
during the night, the dark sailorraab, he had said his name wasstaggered
away, exhausted but with a full purse; he had decided to put his wagers on
mat. mat visited another money changeror perhaps two; the fever seemed
to cloud his brain as badly as his memories of the past were cloudedand
made his way to another game. winning.
and so he found himself, he did not know how many hours later, in a
tavern filled with tabac smokethe tremalking splice, he thought it was
calledstaring down at five dice, each showing a deeply carved crown. most
of the patrons here seemed interested only in drinking as much as they could,
but the rattle of dice and shouts of players from another game in the far corner
were almost submerged by a woman singing to a quick tune from a hammered
dulcimer.
ill dance with a girl with eyes of brown,
or a girl with eyes of green,
ill dance with a girl with any color eyes,
but yours are the prettiest ive seen.
ill kiss a girl with hair of black,
or a girl with hair of gold,
ill kiss a girl with any color hair,
but its you i want to hold.


 the singer had named the song as what he said to me. mat remembered
the tune as will you dance with me, with different words, but at that
moment all he could think of were those dice.
the king again, one of the men squatting with mat muttered. it was the
fifth time in a row mat had thrown the king.
he had won the bet of a gold mark, not even caring by this time that his
andoran mark outweighed the other mans illianer coin, but he scooped the
dice into the leather cup, rattled it hard, and spun them across the floor again.
five crowns. light, it cant be. nobody ever threw the king six times running.
nobody.
the dark ones own luck, another man growled. he was a bulky fellow,
his dark hair tied at the nape of his neck with a black ribbon, with heavy
shoulders, scars on his face, and a nose that had been broken more than once.
mat was scarcely aware of moving before he had the bulky man by the
collar, hauling him to his feet, slamming him back against the wall. dont
you say that! he snarled. dont you ever say that! the man blinked down
at him in astonishment; he was a full head taller than mat.
just a saying, somebody behind him was muttering. light, its just a
saying.
mat released his grip on the scarfaced mans coat and backed away. i. . . .
i . . . i dont like anybody saying things like that about me. im no
darkfriend! burn me, not the dark ones luck. not that! oh, light, did that
bloody dagger really do something to me?
nobody said you was, the brokennosed man muttered. he seemed to be
getting over his surprise, and trying to decide whether to be angry.
gathering his belongings from where he had piled them behind him, mat
walked out of the tavern, leaving the coins where they lay. it was not that he
was afraid of the big man. he had forgotten the man, and the coins, too. all
he wanted was to be outside, in fresh air, where he could think.
in the street, he leaned against the wall of the tavern not far from the door,
breathing the coolness in. the dark streets of southharbor were all but empty,
now. music and laughter still floated from the inns and taverns, but few
people made their way through the night. holding the quarterstaff upright in
front of him with both hands, he lowered his head to his fists and tried to
think at the puzzle from every side.
he knew he was lucky. he could remember always being lucky. but


 somehow, his memories from emonds field did not show him as lucky as he
had been since leaving. certainly he had gotten away with a great deal, but he
could remember also being caught in pranks he had been sure would succeed.
his mother had always seemed to know what he was up to, and nynaeve able
to see through whatever defenses he put up. but it was not just since leaving
the two rivers that he had become lucky. the luck had come once he took
the dagger from shadar logoth. he remembered playing at dice back home
with a sharpeyed, skinny man who worked for a merchant come down from
baerlon to buy tabac. he remembered the strapping his father had given him,
too, on learning mat owed the man a silver mark and four pence.
but im free of the bloody dagger, he mumbled. those bloody aes
sedai said i was. he wondered how much he had won tonight.
when he dug into his coat pockets, he found them filled with loose coins,
crowns and marks, both silver and gold that glittered and glinted in the light
from nearby windows. he had two purses now, it seemed, and both fat. he
undid the strings, and found more gold. and still more stuffed into his belt
pouch between and around and on top of his dice cups, crumpling elaynes
letter and the amyrlins paper. he had a memory of tossing silver pence to
serving girls because they had pretty smiles or pretty eyes or pretty ankles,
and because silver pence were not worth keeping.
not worth keeping? maybe they werent. light, im rich! i am bloody rich!
maybe it was something the aes sedai did. something they did healing me.
by accident, maybe. that could be it. better that the other. those bloody aes
sedai must have done it to me.
a big man moved out from the tavern, the door already swinging shut to
cut off the light that might have shown his face.
mat pressed his back close against the wall, stuffed the purses back into his
coat, and firmed his grip on the quarterstaff. wherever his luck tonight had
come from, he did not mean to lose all that gold to a footpad.
the man turned toward him, peered, then gave a start. ccool night, he
said drunkenly. he staggered closer, and mat saw that most of his size was
fat. i have to. . . . i have to. . . . stumbling, the fat man moved on up the
street, talking to himself disjointedly.
fool! mat muttered, but he was not sure whether he meant it for the fat
man or for himself. time to find a ship to take me away from here. he
squinted at the black sky, trying to estimate how long till dawn. two, maybe
three hours, he thought. past time. his stomach growled at him; he dimly


 recalled eating in some of the inns, but he did not remember what. the fever
of the dice had had him by the throat. a hand pushed into the scrip found only
crumbs. way past time. or one of them will come pick me up with her
fingers and stick me in her pouch. he pushed away from the wall and started
for the docks, where the ships would be.
at first he thought the faint sounds behind him were echoes of his boots on
the cobblestones. then he realized someone was following him. and trying to
be stealthy. well, these are footpads, for sure.
hefting the quarterstaff, he briefly considered turning to confront them. but
it was dark, and the footing on cobblestones uncertain, and he had no idea
how many there were. just because you did well against gawyn and galad
doesnt make you a bloody hero out of a story.
he turned down a narrower, twisting side street, trying to walk on tiptoe
and move quickly at the same time. every window was dark here, and most
shuttered. he was almost to the end when he saw movement ahead, two men
peering into the side street from where it let out onto another. and he heard
slow footsteps behind him, soft scrapes of boot leather on stone.
in an instant he ducked into the shadowy corner where one building stuck
out further than the next. it seemed the best he could do for the moment.
gripping the quarterstaff nervously, he waited.
a man appeared from back the way he had come, crouching as he eased
himself ahead one slow step at a time, and then another man. each carried a
knife in his hand and moved as if stalking.
mat tensed. if they came just a few steps closer before they noticed him
hiding in the deeper shadows of the corner, he could take them by surprise.
he wished his stomach would stop fluttering. those knives were a great deal
shorter than the practice swords, but they were steel, not wood.
one of the men squinted toward the far end of the narrow street and
suddenly straightened, shouting, didnt he come your way, then?
i have seen nothing but the shadows, came the answer in a heavy accent.
i wish to be out of this. there are the strange things moving this night.
not four paces from mat, the two men exchanged looks, sheathed their
knives, and trotted back the way they had come.
he let out a long, slow breath. luck. burn me if its not good for more than
dice.


 he could no longer see the men at the mouth of the street, but he knew they
were still out on the next street somewhere. and more behind him the other
way.
one of the buildings he was crouched against stood only a single story high
here, and the roof looked flat enough. and a white stone frieze carved in huge
grape leaves ran up the joining of the two buildings.
easing his quarterstaff up till one end rested on the edge of the roof, he
gave it a hard shove. it landed with a clatter on the roof tiles. not waiting to
see if anyone had heard, he scrambled up the frieze, the big leaves giving easy
toeholds even for a man in boots. in seconds he had the staff back in hand and
was trotting across the roof, trusting to luck for his footing.
three more times he climbed, each time gaining one story. the slightly
sloping, tiled roofs ran some distance at that level, and there was a breeze at
that height, prickling the hair on the back of his neck with its chill and almost
making him think he was being followed. stop that, fool! theyre three streets
away by now, looking for somebody else with a fat purse, and bad luck to
them.
his boots slipped on the tiles, and he decided it might be a good idea to
think about getting back down into the street himself. cautiously, he moved to
the edge of the roof and peered down. an empty street lay a good forty feet or
more below him, with three taverns and an inn spilling light and music onto
the cobblestones. but off to his right was a stone bridge running from the top
floor of his building to the one on the other side.
the bridge looked awfully narrow, running through darkness untouched by
the tavern lights, arcing over a long fall to hard cobblestones, but he tossed
the quarterstaff down and made himself follow before he could think about it
too much. his boots thumped onto the bridge, and he let himself roll the way
he had as a boy falling out of a tree. he fetched up against the waisthigh
railing.
bad habits pay off in the long run, he told himself as he got to his feet
and picked up the staff.
the window at the other end of the bridge was tightly shuttered and
lightless. he did not think whoever lived in there would appreciate a stranger
appearing in the middle of the night. he could see lots of stonework, but if
there was as much as a fingerhold in reach of the bridge, the night hid it. well,
stranger or no stranger, inside i go.
he turned from the railing and suddenly became aware of a man sharing


 the bridge with him. a man with a dagger in his hand.
mat grabbed at the hand as the knife darted toward his throat. he barely
caught the fellows wrist with his fingers, and then the quarterstaff between
them tangled itself in his legs, tripping him to fall back against the railing, to
fall half over it pulling the other man on top of him. balanced there on the
small of his back, teetering with his assailants bared teeth in his face, he was
as aware of the long drop under his head as he was of the blade catching faint
moonlight as it edged toward his throat. his finger grip on the mans wrist
was slipping, and his other hand was caught with the quarterstaff between
their bodies. only seconds had passed since he first saw the man, and in
seconds more, he was going die with a knife in his throat.
time to toss the dice, he said. he thought the other man looked confused
for an instant, but an instant was all he had. with a heave of his legs, mat
flipped them both off into the empty air.
for a stretchedout moment he seemed to have no weight. air whistled past
his ears and ruffled his hair. he thought he heard the other man scream, or
start to. the impact knocked all the air out of his lungs and made silverblack
flecks dance across his blurring vision.
when he could breathe againand seehe realized he was lying on top of
the man who had attacked him, his fall cushioned by the others body.
luck, he whispered. slowly he climbed to his feet, cursing the bruise the
quarterstaff had put across his ribs.
he expected the other man to be deadnot many could survive a thirtyfoot fall to cobblestones with anothers weight on top of himbut what he
had not expected was to see the fellows dagger driven to the hilt into his own
heart. such an ordinarylooking man to have tried to kill him. mat did not
think he would even have noticed him in a crowded room.
you had bad luck, fellow, he told the corpse shakily.
suddenly, everything that had happened rushed back in on him. the
footpads in the twisting street. the scramble over the rooftops. this fellow.
the fall. his eyes rose to the bridge overhead, and a fit of trembling hit him. i
must have been crazy. a little adventure is one thing, but rogosh eagleeye
wouldnt ask for this.
he realized he was standing over a dead man with a dagger in his chest,
just waiting for someone to come along and run shouting for city guards with
the flame of tar valon on their chests. the amyrlins paper might get him
away from them, but maybe not before she found out. he could still end up


 back in the white tower, without that paper, and possibly not even allowed
outside the tower grounds.
he knew he should be on his way to the docks right then, and on the first
vessel sailing if it was a rotten tub full of old fish, but his knees were shaking
hard enough in reaction that he could hardly walk. what he wanted was to sit
down for just a minute. just a minute to steady his knees, and then he was
headed for the docks.
the taverns were closer, but he started toward the inn. the common room
of an inn was a friendly place, where a man could rest a minute and not worry
about who might be sneaking up behind him. enough light came out through
the windows for him to make out the sign. a woman with her hair in braids,
holding what he thought was an olive branch, and the words the woman of
tanchico.


 c h a p t e r
3 1


the woman of tanchico


the common room of the inn was brightly lit, the tables not near a quarter
full so late. a few whiteaproned serving women with mugs of ale or wine
passed among the men, and a low murmur of talk ran under the sound of a
harp being strummed and plucked. the patrons, some with pipes clenched in
their teeth and one pair hunched over a stones board, had the look of ships
officers and minor merchants from the smaller houses, their coats well cut and
of fine wool, but with none of the gold or silver or embroidery that richer men
might have had. and for once there was no clack and rattle of dice to be
heard. fires blazed on the long hearths at the ends of the room, but even
without those there would have been a warm feeling about the place.
the harper stood on a tabletop, reciting mara and the three foolish
kings, to the music of his harp. his instrument, all worked in gold and silver,
was fit for a palace. mat knew him. he had saved mats life, once.
the harper was a lean man who would have been tall except for a stoop,
and he moved with a limp when he shifted his footing on the tabletop. even
here inside, he wore his cloak, all covered with fluttering patches in a hundred
colors. he always wanted everyone to know he was a gleeman. his long
mustaches and bushy eyebrows were as snowwhite as the thick hair on his
head, and his blue eyes held a look of sorrow as he recited. the look was as
unexpected as the man. mat had never known thom merrilin to be a
sorrowful man.
he took a table, setting his things on the floor by his stool, and ordered two
mugs. the pretty young serving girls big brown eyes twinkled at him.
two, young master? you do not look such a harddrinking man as that.


 her voice held a mischievous edge of laughter.
after rummaging a bit, he brought out two silver pennies from his pocket.
one more than paid for the wine, but he slipped her another for her eyes. my
friend will be joining me.
he knew thom had seen him. the old gleeman had nearly stopped the
story dead when mat came in. that was new, too. few things startled thom
enough for him to let it show, and nothing short of trollocs had ever made
him stop a story in the middle that mat knew. when the girl brought the wine
and his coppers in change, he let the pewter mugs sit and listened to the end
of the story.
 it was as we have said it should be, said king madel, trying to untangle
a fish from his long beard. thoms voice seemed almost to echo inside a
great hall, not an ordinary common room. his plucked harp sounded the three
kings final foolishness.  it was as we said it would be, announced orander.
and, feet slipping in the mud, he sat down with a great splash. it was as we
said it must be, proclaimed kadar as he searched, up to his elbows in the
river, for his crown. the woman knows not whereof she speaks. she is the
fool! madel and orander agreed with him loudly. and with that, mara had
had enough. ive given them all the chances they deserve and more, she
murmured to herself. slipping kadars crown into her bag with the first two,
she climbed back onto her cart, clucked to her mare, and drove straight back
to her village. and when mara had told them all that happened, the people of
heape would have no king at all. he strummed the major theme of the kings
foolishness once more, this time sliding to a crescendo that sounded even
more like laughter, made a sweeping bow, and nearly fell off the table.
men laughed and stamped their feet, though likely every one of them had
heard the story many times before, and called for more. the story of mara
was always well received, except perhaps by kings.
thom nearly fell again climbing down from the table, and he was more
unsteady in his walk than a somewhat stiff leg could account for as he came
to where mat was sitting. casually putting his harp on the table, he dropped
onto a stool in front of the second mug and gave mat a flat stare. his eyes had
always been sharp as awls, but they seemed to be having trouble focusing.
common, he muttered. his voice was still deep, but it no longer seemed
to reverberate. the tale is a hundred times better in plain chant, and a
thousand in high, but they want common. without another word, he buried
his face in his wine.


 mat could not recall ever seeing thom finish playing that harp without
immediately putting it away in its hard leather case. he had never seen him
the worse for drink. it was a relief to hear the gleeman complaining about his
listeners; thom never thought their standards were as high as his. at least
something of him had not changed.
the serving girl was back, with no twinkle in her eyes. oh, thom, she
said softly, then rounded on mat. if id known he was the friend you
awaited, id not have brought you wine for him if you gave a hundred silver
pence.
i did not know he was drunk, mat protested.
but her attention was back on thom, her voice gentle again. thom, you
need some rest. theyll keep you telling stories all night and all day, if you let
them.
another woman appeared on thoms other side, lifting her apron off over
her head. she was older than the first, but no less pretty. the two might have
been sisters. a beautiful story, ive always thought, thom, and you tell it
beautifully. come, ive slipped a warming pan into your bed, and you can tell
me all about the court in caemlyn.
thom peered into the mug as if surprised to find it empty, then blew out his
long mustaches and looked from one woman to the other. pretty mada.
pretty saal. did i ever tell you that two pretty women have loved me in my
life? that is more than most men can claim.
youve told us all about it, thom, the older woman said sadly. the
younger glared at mat as if this were all his fault.
two, thom murmured. morgase had a temper, but i thought i could
ignore that, so it ended with her wanting to kill me. dena, i killed. as good
as. not much difference. two chances ive had, more than most, and i threw
them both away.
i will take care of him, mat said. mada and saal were both glaring at
him, now. he gave them his best smile, but it did not work. his stomach
muttered loudly. dont i smell chicken roasting? bring me three or four.
the two women blinked and exchanged startled looks when he added, do
you want something to eat, too, thom?
i could do with more of this fine andoran wine. the gleeman raised his
cup hopefully.
no more wine for you tonight, thom. the older woman would have


 taken his cup if he had let her.
almost on top of the first woman, the younger said, in a mixture of
firmness and pleading, youll have some chicken, thom. it is very good.
neither would leave until the gleeman agreed to eat something, and when
they did go, they gave mat such a combination of stares and sniffs that he
could only shake his head. burn me, you would think i was encouraging him
to drink more! women! but pretty eyes on the pair of them.
rand said you were alive, he told thom when mada and saal were out of
hearing. moiraine always said she thought you were. but i heard you were in
cairhien, and meaning to go on to tear.
rand is still well, then? thoms eyes sharpened to almost the keenness
mat remembered. i am not sure i expected that. moiraine is still with him, is
she? a finelooking woman. a fine woman, if she were not aes sedai.
meddle with that sort, and you get more than your fingers burned.
why wouldnt you expect rand to be all right? mat asked carefully. do
you know of something that could harm him?
know? i dont know anything, boy. i suspect more than is healthy for me,
but i know nothing.
mat abandoned that line of talk. no use firming his suspicions. no use
letting him know i know more thans healthy myself.
the older womanthom called her madacame back with three
chickens with crisp, brown skins, giving the whitehaired man a worried look,
and mat a warning one, before she left. mat ripped off a leg and set to as he
talked. thom frowned into his cup and never looked at the birds.
why are you here in tar valon, thom? its the last place id have
expected to see you, the way you feel about aes sedai. i heard you were
coining money in cairhien.
cairhien, the old gleeman muttered, the sharpness fading from his eyes
again. such trouble it causes killing a man, even when he deserves killing.
he made a flourish with one hand and was holding a knife. thom always had
knives secreted about him. drunk he might have been, but he held the blade
steady enough. kill a man who needs killing, and sometimes others pay for
it. the question is, was it worth doing anyway? theres always a balance, you
know. good and evil. light and shadow. we would not be human if there
wasnt a balance.


 put that away, mat growled around a mouthful. i dont want to talk
about killing. light, that fellow is still lying right out there in the street. burn
me, i ought to be on a ship by now. i just asked why youre in tar valon. if
you had to leave cairhien because you killed someone, i do not want to know
about it. blood and ashes, if you cant pull your wits out of the wine enough
to talk straight, ill leave now.
with a sour look, thom made the knife disappear. why am i in tar valon?
im here because it is the worst place i could be, except maybe caemlyn. its
what i deserve, boy. some of the red ajah still remember me. i saw elaida in
the street the other day. if she knew i was here, she would peel my hide off in
strips, and then she would stop being pleasant.
i never knew you to feel sorry for yourself, mat said disgustedly. do
you mean to drown yourself in wine?
what do you know of it, boy? thom snarled. put a few years on you,
see something of life, maybe love a woman or two, and then youll know.
perhaps you will, if you have the brains to learn. aaaah! you want to know
why im in tar valon? why are you in tar valon? i remember you shivering
when you found out moiraine was aes sedai. you nearly soiled yourself
every time anybody even mentioned the power. what are you doing in tar
valon, with aes sedai on every side?
i am leaving tar valon. thats what i am doing here. leaving! mat
grimaced. the gleeman had saved his life, and maybe more. a fade had been
involved. that was why thoms right leg did not work as well as it should.
there could not be enough wine on a ship to keep him this drunk. i am going
to caemlyn, thom. if you need to risk your fool life for some reason, why not
come with me?
caemlyn? thom said musingly.
caemlyn, thom. elaida will likely be going back there sooner or later, so
youd have her to worry about. and from what i remember, if morgase puts
her hands on you, you will wish elaida had you.
caemlyn. yes. caemlyn would fit my mood like a glove. the gleeman
glanced at the chicken platter and gave a start. what did you do, boy? stuff
them up your sleeve? there was nothing left of the three birds but bones and
carcasses with only a few strips of flesh remaining.
sometimes i get hungry, mat muttered. it was an effort not to lick his
fingers. are you coming with me, or not?


 oh, i will come, boy. as thom pushed himself to his feet, he did not
seem as unsteady as he had been. you wait hereand try not to eat the table
while i get my things and say some goodbyes. he limped away, not
staggering once.
mat drank a little of his wine and stripped off a few shreds that were left on
the chicken carcasses, wondering if he had time to order another, but thom
was back quickly. his harp and flute in their dark leather cases hung on his
back with a tied blanketroll. he carried a plain walking staff as tall as he was.
the two serving women followed on either side. mat decided they were
sisters. identical big brown eyes looked up at the gleeman with identical
expressions. thom was kissing first saal, then mada, and patting cheeks as he
headed for the door, jerking his head for mat to follow. he was outside before
mat could finish collecting his own belongings and pick up his quarterstaff.
the younger of the two women, saal, stopped mat as he reached the door.
whatever you said to him, i forgive you for the wine, even if it is taking him
away. ive not seen him this alive in weeks. she pressed something into his
hand, and when he glanced at it, his eyes widened in confusion. she had given
him a silver tar valon mark. for whatever it was you said. besides, whoever
is feeding you is not doing a good job of it, but you still have pretty eyes.
she laughed at the expression on his face.
mat was laughing, too, in spite of himself, as he went out into the street,
rolling the silver coin across the backs of his fingers. so i have pretty eyes, do
i? his laughter shut off like the last drip from a wine barrel: thom was there,
but not the corpse. the windows of the taverns down the street put enough
light across the cobblestones for him to be sure of it. the city guard would not
have carried a dead man away without asking questions, at those taverns and
at the woman of tanchico, too.
what are you staring at, boy? thom asked. no trollocs in those
shadows.
footpads, mat muttered. i was thinking about footpads.
no street thieves or strongarms in tar valon, either, boy. when the
guards take a footpadnot that many try that game here; the word spreads
but when they do, they haul him to the tower, and whatever it is the aes
sedai do to him, the fellow leaves tar valon the next day as wideeyed as a
goosed girl. i understand theyre even harder on women caught thieving. no,
the only way youll have your money stolen here is somebody selling you
polished brass for gold or using shaved dice. there are no footpads.


 mat turned on his heel and strode past thom, heading toward the docks,
quarterstaff thumping off the cobblestones as if he could push himself ahead
faster. were going to be on the first ship sailing, whatever it is. the first,
thom.
thoms stick clicked hurriedly after him. slow down, boy. whats your
hurry? there are plenty of ships, sailing day and night. slow down. there
arent any footpads.
the first bloody ship, thom! if its sinking, well be on it! if they werent
footpads, what were they? they had to be thieves. what else could they be?


 c h a p t e r
3 2


the first ship


southharbor


itself, the great ogiermade basin, was huge and round,


surrounded by high walls of the same silverstreaked white stone as the rest of
tar valon. one long wharf, most of it roofed, ran all the way around, except
where the wide water gates stood open to give access to the river. vessels of
every size lined the wharf, most moored by the stern, and despite the hour
dockmen in coarse, sleeveless shirts hurried about loading and unloading
bales and chests, crates and barrels, with ropes and booms, or on their backs.
lamps hanging from the roof beams lit the wharfs and made a band of light
around the black water in the middle of the harbor. small open boats scuttled
through the darkness, the square lanterns atop their tall sternposts making it
seem as if fireflies skittered across the harbor. they were small only
compared to the ships, though; some had as many as six pairs of long oars.
when mat led a stillmuttering thom under an arch of polished redstone
and down broad steps to the wharf, crewmen on one threemasted ship were
unfastening the mooring lines not twenty paces away. the vessel was larger
than most mat could see, between fifteen and twenty spans from sharp bow to
squared stern, with a flat, railed deck almost level with the wharf. the
important thing was that it was casting off. the first ship that sails.
a grayhaired man came up the wharf: three lines of hemp rope sewn down
the sleeves of his dark coat marked him as a dockmaster. his wide shoulders
suggested that he might have begun as a dockman hauling rope instead of
wearing it. he glanced casually in mats direction, and stopped, surprise on
his leathery face. your bundles say what youre planning, lad, but you might
as well forget it. the sister showed me a drawing of you. youll board no ship
in southharbor, lad. go back up those stairs so i dont have to tell a man off to


 watch you.
what under the light . . . ? thom murmured.
thats all changed, mat said firmly. the ship was casting off the last
mooring line; the furled triangular sails still made thick, pale bundles on the
long, slanted booms, but men were readying the sweeps. he pulled the
amyrlins paper out of his pouch and thrust it in the dockmasters face. as
you can see, im on the business of the tower, at the order of the amyrlin
seat herself. and i have to leave on that very vessel there.
the dockmaster read the words, then read them again. i never saw such a
thing in my life. why would the tower say you couldnt go, then give you . . .
that?
ask the amyrlin, if you want, mat told him in a weary voice that said he
did not think anyone could possibly be stupid enough to do that, but shell
have my hide, and yours, if i do not sail on that ship.
youll never make it, the dockmaster said, but he was already cupping
his hands to his mouth. aboard the gray gull there! stop! the light burn
you, stop!
the shirtless fellow at the tiller looked back, then spoke to a tall companion
in a dark coat with puffy sleeves. the tall man never took his eyes off the
crewmen just dipping the sweeps into the water. give way together, he
called, and sweepblades curled up froth.
ill make it, mat snapped. the first ship i said, and the first ship i meant!
come on, thom!
without waiting to see if the gleeman followed, he ran down the wharf,
dodging around men and barrows stacked with cargo. the gap between the
gray gulls stern and the wharf widened as the sweeps bit deeper. hefting his
quarterstaff, he hurled it ahead of him toward the ship like a spear, took one
more step, and jumped as hard as he could.
the dark water passing beneath his feet looked icy, but in a heartbeat he
had cleared the ships rail and was rolling across the deck. as he scrambled to
his feet, he heard a grunt and a curse behind him.
thom merrilin hoisted himself up on the railing with another curse, and
climbed over onto the deck. i lost my stick, he muttered. ill want
another. rubbing his right leg, he peered down at the still widening strip of
water behind the vessel and shivered. i had a bath today already. the
shirtless steersman stared wideeyed from him to mat and back again,


 clutching the tiller as if wondering whether he could use it to defend himself
from madmen.
the tall man seemed nearly as stunned. his pale blue eyes bulged, and his
mouth worked soundlessly for a moment. his dark beard, cut to a point,
seemed to quiver with rage, and his narrow face grew purple. by the stone!
he bellowed finally. what is the meaning of this? ive no room on this vessel
for as much as a ships cat, and id not take vagabonds who leap onto my
decks if i did. sanor! vasa! heave this rubbish over the side! two extremely
large men, barefoot and stripped to the waist, straightened from coiling lines
and started toward the stern. the men at the sweeps continued their work,
bending to lift the blades, taking three long steps along the deck, then
straightening and walking backwards, hauling the ship ahead on their blades.
mat waved the amyrlins paper toward the bearded manthe captain, he
supposedwith one hand, and fished a gold crown out of his pouch with the
other, taking care even in his haste that the fellow saw there were more where
that came from. tossing the heavy coin to the man, he spoke quickly, still
waving the paper. for the inconvenience of our boarding as we did, captain.
more to come for passage. on business of the white tower. personal
command of the amyrlin seat. imperative we sail immediately. to aringill,
in andor. utmost urgency. the blessings of the white tower on all who aid
us; the towers wrath on any who impede us.
certain the man had seen the flame of tar valon seal by that timeand
little more, mat hopedhe folded the paper again and thrust it back out of
sight. eyeing the two big men uneasily as they came up on either side of the
captainburn me, they both have arms like perrins!he wished he had his
quarterstaff in hand. he could see it lying where it had landed, further down
the deck. he tried to look sure and confident, the sort of man others had better
not trifle with, a man with the power of the white tower behind him. a long
way behind me, i hope.
the captain looked at mat doubtfully, and even more so at thom in his
gleemans cloak and none too steady afoot, but he motioned sanor and vasa
to stop where they were. i would not anger the tower. burn my soul, for the
time being the river trade takes me from tear to this den of. . . . i come too
often to anger . . . anyone. a tight smile appeared on his face. but i spoke
the truth. by the stone, i did! six cabins i have for passengers, and all full.
you can sleep on deck and eat with the crew for another gold crown. each.
that is ridiculous! thom snapped. i dont care what the war has done
downriver, that is ridiculous! the two large sailors shifted their bare feet.


 it is the price, the captain said firmly. i do not want to anger anyone, but
id as soon not have any business you can be on aboard my vessel. like
letting a man pay you so he can coat you with hot tar, mixing in that business.
you pay the price, or you go over the side, and the amyrlin seat herself can
dry you off. and ill keep this for the trouble youve given me, thank you.
he stuffed the gold crown mat has tossed him into a pocket of his puffysleeved coat.
how much for one of the cabins? mat asked. to ourselves. you can put
whoever is in it now with someone else. he did not want to sleep out in the
cold night. and if you dont overwhelm a fellow like this, hell steal your
breeches and say he is doing you a favor. his stomach rumbled loudly. and
we eat what you eat, not with the crew. and plenty of it!
mat, thom said, im the one who is supposed to be drunk here. he
turned to the captain, flourishing his patchcovered cloak as well as he could
with blanketroll and instrument cases hung about him. as you may have
noticed, captain, i am a gleeman. even in the open air, his voice suddenly
seemed to echo. for the price of our passages, i would be more than glad to
entertain your passengers and your crew
my crew is aboard to work, gleeman, not be entertained. the captain
stroked his pointed beard; his pale eyes priced mats plain coat to the copper.
so you want a cabin, do you? he barked a laugh. and my meals? well,
you can have my cabin and my meals. for five gold crowns from each of you!
andoran weight! those were the heaviest. he began to laugh so hard his
words came out in wheezes. flanking him, sanor and vasa grinned wide
grins. for ten crowns, you can take my cabin, and my meals, and ill move
in with the passengers and eat with the crew. burn my soul, i will! by the
stone, i swear it! for ten gold crowns. . . . laughter choked off anything
else.
he was still laughing and gasping for breath and wiping tears from his eyes
when mat pulled out one of his two purses, but laughter stopped by the time
mat had counted five crowns into his hands. the captain blinked in disbelief;
the two big crewmen looked poleaxed.
andoran weight, you said? mat asked. it was hard to judge without
scales, but he laid seven more on the pile. two actually were andoran, and he
thought the others made up the weight. close enough, for this fellow. after a
moment, he added another two gold tairen crowns. for whoever youll be
pushing out of the cabin they paid for. he did not think the passengers would
see a copper of it, but it sometimes paid to appear generous. unless you


 mean to share with them? no, of course not. they ought to have something
for having to crowd in with others. theres no need for you to eat with your
crew, captain. you are welcome to share thoms meals and mine in your
cabin. thom stared at him as hard as the others did.
are you . . . ? the bearded mans voice was a hoarse whisper. are you
. . . by any chance . . . a young lord in disguise?
i am no lord. mat laughed. he had reason to laugh. the gray gull was
well out into the darkness of the harbor, now, with the wharf a band of light
pointing up the black gap, not far ahead now, where the water gates let out
onto the river. the sweeps drove the vessel toward that gap quickly. men
were already swinging the long, slanting booms around preparatory to
unlashing the sails. and with gold in his hands, the captain no longer seemed
ready to throw anyone overboard. if you dont mind, captain, could we see
our cabin? your cabin, i mean. its late, and i for one want a few hours
sleep. his stomach spoke to him. and supper!
as the vessel put its bow into the blackness, the bearded man himself led
the way down a ladder to a short, narrow passage lined with doors set close
together. while the captain cleared his things from his cabinit ran the width
of the stern, with its bed and all of its furnishings built into the walls except
two chairs and a few chestsand saw that mat and thom were settled, mat
learned a great deal, beginning with the fact that the man would not be
pushing any passengers out of their quarters. he had too much respect for the
coin they had paid, if not for them, to allow that. the captain would take his
firsts cabin, and that officer would take the seconds bed, pushing each lower
man down till the deckmaster would end sleeping up in the bow with the
crew.
mat did not think that information could be very useful, but he listened to
everything the man said. it was always best to know not only where you were
going, but who you were dealing with, or they might just take your coat and
boots and leave you to walk home through the rain in bare feet.
the captain was a tairen named huan mallia, and he spoke with great
volubility once he had worked out mat and thom to his own satisfaction. he
was not nobly born, he said, not him, but he would not have anyone think he
was a fool. a young man with more gold than any young man should have by
right might be a thief, if everyone did not know thieves never escaped tar
valon with their haul. a young man dressed like a farmboy but with the air
and confidence of the lord he denied beingby the stone, ill not say you
are, if you say you are not. mallia winked and chuckled and tugged the point


 of his beard. a young man carrying a paper bearing the amyrlin seats seal
and bound for andor. there was no secret that queen morgase had visited tar
valon, though her reason certainly was. it was obvious to mallia something
was afoot between caemlyn and tar valon. and mat and thom were
messengersfor morgase, he thought, by mats accent. anything he could do
to help in so great an enterprise would be his pleasure, not that he meant to
poke where he was not wanted.
mat exchanged startled looks with thom, who was stowing his instrument
cases under a table built out from one wall. the room had two small windows
on either side, and a pair of lamps in jointed brackets for light. thats
nonsense, mat said.
of course, mallia replied. he straightened from pulling clothes out of a
chest at the foot of the bed and smiled. of course. a cupboard in the wall
seemed to hold charts of the river he would need. ill say no more.
but he did mean to poke, though he attempted to disguise it, and he
rambled while he tried to pry. mat listened, and answered the questions with
grunts or shrugs or a word or two, while thom said less than that. the
gleeman kept shaking his head while unburdening himself of his possessions.
mallia had been a river man all his life, though he dreamed of sailing on
the sea. he hardly spoke of a country beside tear without contempt; andor
was the only one to escape, and the praise he finally managed was grudging
despite his obvious efforts. good horses in andor, ive heard. not bad. not
as good as tairen stock, but good enough. you make good steel, and iron
goods, bronze and copperive traded for them often enough, though you
charge a weighty pricebut then you have those mines in the mountains of
mist. gold mines, too. we have to earn our gold, in tear.
mayene received his greatest contempt. even less a country than murandy
is. one city and a few leagues of land. they underprice the oil from our good
tairen olives just because their ships know how to find the oilfish shoals.
theyve no right to be a country at all.
he hated illian. one day well loot illian bare, tear down every town and
village, and sow their filthy ground with salt. mallias beard almost bristled
with outrage at how filthy the illian land was. even their olives are putrid!
one day well carry every last illianer pig off in chains! that is what the high
lord samon says.
mat wondered what the man thought tear would do with all those people if
they actually fulfilled this scheme. the illianers would have to be fed, and


 they would surely do no work in chains. it made no sense to him, but mallias
eyes shone when he spoke of it.
only fools let themselves be ruled by a king or a queen, by one man or
woman. except queen morgase, of course, he put in hastily. she is a fine
woman, so ive heard. beautiful, im told. all those fools bowing to one
fool. the high lords ruled tear together, reaching decisions in concert, and
that was how things should be. the high lords knew what was right and
good and true. especially the high lord samon. no man could go wrong
obeying the high lords. especially the high lord samon.
beyond kings and queens, beyond even illian, lay a bigger hatred mallia
attempted to keep hidden, but he talked so much in trying to find out what
they were up to, and grew so carried away by the sound of his own voice, that
he let more slip than he intended.
they must travel a great deal, serving a great queen like morgase. they
must have seen many lands. he dreamed of the sea because then he could see
lands he had only heard of, because then he could find the mayener oilfish
shoals, could outtrade the sea folk and the filthy illianers. and the sea was
far from tar valon. they must understand that, forced as they were to travel
among odd places and people, places and people they could not have
stomached if they were not serving queen morgase.
i never liked docking there, never knowing who might be using the
power. he almost spat the last word. since he had heard the high lord
samon speak, though. . . . burn my soul, it makes me feel like hullworms are
burrowing into my belly just looking at their white tower, now, knowing
what they plan.
the high lord samon said the aes sedai meant to rule the world. samon
said they meant to crush every nation, put their foot on every mans throat.
samon said tear could no longer hold the power out of its own lands and
believe that was enough. samon said tear had its rightful day of glory
coming, but tar valon stood between tear and glory.
theres no hope for it. sooner or later they will have to be hunted down
and killed, every last aes sedai. the high lord samon says the others might
be savedthe young ones, the novices, the acceptedif theyre brought to
the stone, but the rest must be eradicated. thats what the high lord samon
says. the white tower must be destroyed.
for a moment mallia stood in the middle of his cabin, arms full of clothes
and books and rolled charts, hair almost brushing the deck beams overhead,


 staring at nothing with pale blue eyes while the white tower tumbled into
ruin. then he gave a start as if realizing what he had just said. his pointed
beard waggled uncertainly.
that is . . . thats what he says. i . . . i think that may be going too far,
myself. the high lord samon. . . . he speaks so that he carries a man beyond
his own beliefs. if caemlyn can make covenants with the tower, why, so can
tear. he shivered and did not seem to know it. that is what i say.
as you say, mat told him, and felt mischief bubble inside. i think your
suggestion is the right one, captain. but dont stop with a few accepted,
though. ask a dozen aes sedai to come, or two. think what the stone of tear
would be like with two dozen aes sedai in it.
mallia shuddered. i will send a man for my money chest, he said stiffly,
and stalked out.
mat frowned at the closed door. i think i shouldnt have said that.
i dont know why you might think that, thom said dryly. next you
could try telling the lord captain commander of the whitecloaks he should
marry the amyrlin seat. his brows drew down, like white caterpillars. high
lord samon. i never heard of any high lord samon.
it was mats turn to be dry. well, even you cannot know everything about
all the kings and queens and nobles there are, thom. one or two might just
have escaped your notice.
i know the names of the kings and queens, boy, and the names of all the
high lords of tear, too. i suppose they could have raised a lord of the land,
but id think i would have heard of the old high lord dying. if you had
settled for booting some poor fellows out of their cabin instead of taking the
captains, wed each have a bed to ourselves, narrow and hard as it might be.
now we have to share mallias. i hope you dont snore, boy. i cannot abide
snoring.
mat ground his teeth. as he recalled, thom had a snore like a woodrasp
working on an oak knot. he had forgotten that.
it was one of the two large mensanor or vasa; he did not give his name
who came to pull the captains ironbound money chest from under the bed.
he never said a word, only made sketchy bows, and frowned at them when he
thought they were not looking, and left.
mat was beginning to wonder if the luck that had been with him all night
had deserted him at last. he was going to have to put up with thoms snoring,


 and truth to tell, it might not have been the best luck in the world to jump onto
this particular ship waving a paper signed by the amyrlin seat and sealed
with the flame of tar valon. on impulse he pulled out one of his cylindrical
leather dice cups, popped off the tightfitting lid, and upended the dice onto
the table.
they were spotted dice, and five single pips stared up at him. the dark
ones eyes, that was called in some games. it was a losing toss in those, a
winning in other games. but what game am i playing? he scooped the dice
up, tossed them again. five pips. another toss, and again the dark ones eyes
winked at him.
if you used those dice to win all that gold, thom said quietly, no
wonder you had to leave by the first ship sailing. he had stripped down to
his shirt, and had that half over his head when he spoke. his knees were
knobby and his legs seemed all sinew and stringy muscle, the right a little
shrunken. boy, a twelveyearold girl would cut your heart out if she knew
you were using dice like that against her.
it isnt the dice, mat muttered. its the luck. aes sedai luck? or the
dark ones luck? he pushed the dice back into the cup and capped it.
i suppose, thom said, climbing into the bed, you arent going to tell me
where all that gold came from, then.
i won it. tonight. with their dice.
uhhuh. and i suppose youre not going to explain that paper you were
waving aroundi saw the seal, boy!or all that talk about white tower
business, or why the dockmaster had your description from an aes sedai,
either.
i am carrying a letter to morgase for elayne, thom, mat said a good deal
more patiently than he felt. nynaeve gave me the paper. i dont know where
she got it.
well, if you are not going to tell me, i am going to sleep. blow out the
lamps, will you? thom rolled on his side and pulled a pillow over his head.
even after mat had stripped off down to his smallclothes and crawled
under the blanketsafter blowing out the lampshe could not sleep, though
mallia had done well by himself with a good feather mattress. he had been
right about thoms snoring, and that pillow muffled nothing. it sounded as if
thom were cutting wood crossgrain with a rusty saw. and he could not stop
thinking. how had nynaeve and egwene, and elayne, gotten that paper from


 the amyrlin? they had to be involved with the amyrlin seat herselfin
some plot, one of those white tower machinationsbut now that he thought
about it, they had to be holding something back from the amyrlin, too.
 please carry a letter to my mother, mat,  he said softly, in a highpitched, mocking voice. fool! the amyrlin would have sent a warder with
any letter from the daughterheir to the queen. blind fool, wanting to get out
of the tower so bad i couldnt see it. thoms snore seemed to trumpet
agreement.
most of all, though, he thought about luck, and footpads.
the first bump of something against the stern barely registered on him. he
paid no attention to a thump and scuffle from the deck overhead, or the tread
of boots. the vessel itself made enough noises, and there had to be someone
on deck for the ship to make its way downriver. but stealthy footsteps in the
passageway leading to his door merged with thoughts of footpads and made
his ears prick up.
he nudged thom in the ribs with an elbow. wake up, he said softly.
theres somebody outside in the hall. he was already easing himself off the
bed, hoping the cabin floordeck, floor, whatever it bloody is!would not
creak under his feet. thom grunted, smacked his lips, and resumed snoring.
there was no time to worry about thom. the footsteps were right outside.
taking up his quarterstaff, mat placed himself in front of the door and waited.
the door swung open slowly, and two cloaked men, one behind the other,
were faintly outlined by dim moonlight through the hatch at the top of the
ladder they had crept down. the moonlight was enough to glint off bare knife
blades. both men gasped; they obviously had not expected to find anyone
waiting for them.
mat thrust with the quarterstaff, catching the first man hard right under
where his ribs joined together. he heard his fathers voice as he struck. its a
killing blow, mat. dont ever use it unless its your life. but those knives made
it for his life; there was no room in the cabin for swinging a staff.
even as the man made a choking sound and folded toward the deck,
fighting vainly for breath, mat stepped forward and drove the end of the
quarterstaff over him into the second mans throat with a loud crunch. that
fellow dropped his knife to clutch at his throat, and fell on top of his
companion, both of them scraping their boots across the deck, death rattles
already sounding in their throats.


 mat stood there, staring down at them. two men. no, burn me, three! i
dont think i ever hurt another human being before, and now ive killed three
men in one night. light!
silence filled the dark passageway, and he heard the thump of boots on the
deck overhead. the crewmen all went barefoot.
trying not to think about what he was doing, mat ripped the cloak from
one of the dead men and settled it around his shoulders, hiding the pale linen
of his smallclothes. on bare feet he padded down the passage and climbed the
ladder, barely sticking his eyes above the hatch coping.
pale moonlight reflected off the taut sails, but night still covered the deck
with shadows, and there was no sound except the rush of water along the
vessels sides. only one man at the tiller, the hood of his cloak pulled up
against the chill, seemed to be on deck. the man shifted, and boot leather
scuffed on the deck planks.
holding the quarterstaff low and hoping it would not be noticed, mat
climbed on up. hes dead, he muttered in a low, rough whisper.
i hope he squealed when you cut his throat. the heavily accented voice
was one mat remembered calling from the mouth of a twisting street in tar
valon. this boy, he causes us too much of the trouble, wait! who are you?
mat swung the staff with all his strength. the thick wood smashed into the
mans head, the hood of his cloak only partly muffling a sound like a melon
hitting the floor.
the man fell across the tiller, shoving it over, and the vessel lurched,
staggering mat. out of the corner of his eye he saw a shape rising out of the
shadows by the railing, and the gleam of a blade, and he knew he would never
get his staff around before it struck home. something else that shone streaked
through the night and merged with the dim shape with a dull thunk. the rising
motion became a fall, and a man sprawled almost at mats feet.
a babble of voices rose belowdecks as the ship swung again, the tiller
shifting with the first mans weight.
thom limped from the hatch in cloak and smallclothes, raising the shutter
on a bullseye lantern. you were lucky, boy. one of those below had this
lantern. could have set the ship on fire, lying there. the light showed a knife
hilt sticking up from the chest of a man with dead, staring eyes. mat had
never seen him before; he was sure he would have remembered someone with
that many scars on his face. thom kicked a dagger away from the dead mans


 outflung hand, then bent to retrieve his own knife, wiping the blade on the
corpses cloak. very lucky, boy. very lucky indeed.
there was a rope tied to the stern rail. thom stepped over to it, shining the
light down astern, and mat joined him. at the other end of the rope was one
of the small boats from southharbor, its square lantern extinguished. two
more men stood among the pulledin oars.
the great lord take me, its him! one of them gasped. the other darted
forward to work frantically at the knot holding the rope.
you want to kill these two as well? thom asked, his voice booming as it
did when he performed.
no, thom, mat said quietly. no.
the men in the boat must have heard the question and not the answer, for
they abandoned the attempt to free their boat and leaped over the side with
great splashes. the sound of them thrashing away across the river was loud.
fools, thom muttered. the river narrows somewhat after tar valon, but
it must still be half a mile or more wide here. theyll never make it in the
dark.
by the stone! came a shout from the hatch. what happens here? there
are dead men in the passageway! whats vasa doing lying on the tiller? hell
run us onto a mudbank! naked save for linen underbreeches, mallia dashed
to the tiller, hauling the dead man off roughly as he pulled the long lever to
put the course straight again. that isnt vasa! burn my soul, who are all
these dead men? others were clambering on deck now, barefoot crewmen
and frightened passengers wrapped in cloaks and blankets.
shielding his actions with his body, thom slipped his knife under the rope
and severed it in one stroke. the small boat began falling back into the
darkness. river brigands, captain, he said. young mat and i have saved
your vessel from river brigands. they might have cut everyones throat if not
for us. perhaps you should reconsider your passage fee.
brigands! mallia exclaimed. there are plenty of those down around
cairhien, but i never heard of it this far north! the huddled passengers began
to mutter about brigands and having their throats cut.
mat walked stiffly to the hatch. behind him, he heard mallia. hes a cold
one. i never heard that andor employed assassins, but burn my soul, he is a
cold one.


 mat stumbled down the ladder, stepped over the two bodies in the passage,
and slammed the door of the captains cabin behind him. he made it halfway
to the bed before the shaking hit him, and then all he could do was sink down
on his knees. light, what game am i playing in? i have to know the game if
im going to win. light, what game?
playing rose of the morning softly on his flute, rand peered into his
campfire, where a rabbit was roasting on a stick slanting over the flames. a
night wind made the flames flicker; he barely noticed the smell of the rabbit,
though a vagrant thought did come that he needed to find more salt in the next
village or town. rose of the morning was one of the tunes he had played at
those weddings.
how many days ago was that? were there really so many, or did i imagine
it? every woman in the village deciding to marry at once? what was its
name? am i going mad already?
sweat beaded on his face, but he played on, barely loud enough to be
heard, staring into the fire. moiraine had told him he was taveren. everyone
said he was taveren. maybe he really was. people like thatchanged
things around them. a taveren might have caused all those weddings. but
that was too close to something he did not want to think about.
they say im the dragon reborn, too. they all say it. the living say it, and
the dead. that doesnt make it true. i had to let them proclaim me. duty. i had
no choice, but that does not make it true.
he could not seem to stop playing that one tune. it made him think of
egwene. he had thought once that he would marry egwene. a long time ago,
that seemed. that was gone, now. she had come in his dreams, though. it
might have been her. her face. it was her face.
only, there had been so many faces, faces he knew. tam, and his mother,
and mat, and perrin. all trying to kill him. it had not really been them, of
course. only their faces, on shadowspawn. he thought it had not really been
them. even in his dreams it seemed the shadowspawn walked. were they
only dreams? some dreams were real, he knew. and others were only dreams,
nightmares, or hopes. but how to tell the difference? min had walked his
dreams one nightand tried to plant a knife in his back. he was still
surprised at how much that had pained him. he had been careless, let her
come close, let down his guard. around min, he had not felt any need to be
on his guard in so long, despite the things she saw when she looked at him.


 being with her had been like having balm soothed into his wounds.
and then she tried to kill me! the music rose to a discordant screech, but he
pulled it back to softness. not her. shadowspawn with her face. least of them
all would min hurt me. he could not understand why he thought that, but he
was sure it was true.
so many faces in his dreams. selene had come, cool and mysterious and so
lovely his mouth went dry just thinking of her, offering him glory as she had
so long ago, it seemedbut now it was the sword she said he had to take.
and with the sword would come selene. callandor. that was always in his
dreams. always. and taunting faces. hands, pushing egwene, and nynaeve,
and elayne into cages, snaring them in nets, hurting them. why should he
weep more for elayne than for the other two?
his head spun. his head hurt as much as his side, and sweat rolled down
his face, and he softly played rose of the morning through the night,
fearing to sleep. fearing to dream.


 c h a p t e r
3 3


within the weave


from his saddle, perrin frowned down at the flat stone half hidden in weeds
by the roadside. this road of hardpacked dirt, already called the lugard
road now they were near the manetherendrelle and the border of murandy,
had been paved once, long in the past, so moiraine had said two days earlier,
and bits of paving stone still worked their way to the surface from time to
time. this one had an odd marking on it.
if dogs had been able to make footprints on stone, he would have said it
was the print of a large hound. there were no hounds footprints in any of the
bare ground he could see, where softer dirt on the verge might take one, and
no smell of any dogs trail. just a faint trace in the air of something burned,
almost the sulphurous smell left by setting off fireworks. there was a town
ahead, where the road struck the river; maybe some children had sneaked out
here with some of the illuminators handiwork.
a long way yet for children to sneak. but he had seen farms. it could have
been farm children. whatever it is, it has nothing to do with that marking.
horses dont fly, and dogs dont make footprints on stone. im getting too tired
to think straight.
yawning, he dug his heels into steppers ribs, and the dun broke into a
gallop after the others. moiraine had been pushing them hard since leaving
jarra, and there was no waiting for anyone who stopped for even a moment.
when the aes sedai put her mind on something, she was as hard as cold
hammered iron. loial had given up reading as he rode six days earlier, after
looking up to find himself left a mile behind and everyone else almost out of
sight over the next hill.


 perrin slowed stepper alongside the ogiers big horse, behind moiraines
white mare, and yawned again. lan was up ahead somewhere, scouting. the
sun behind them stood no more than an hour above the treetops, but the
warder had said they would reach a town called remen, on the
manetherendrelle, before dark. perrin was not sure he wanted to see what
awaited them there. he did not know what it might be, but the days since
jarra had made him wary.
i dont see why you cant sleep, loial told him. i am so tired by the time
she lets us halt for the night, i fall asleep before i can lie down.
perrin only shook his head. there was no way to explain to loial that he
did not dare sleep soundly, that even his lightest sleep was full of troubled
dreams. like that odd one with egwene and hopper in it. well, no wonder i
dream about her. light, i wonder how she is. safe in the tower by now, and
learning how to be aes sedai. verin will look after her, and after mat, too. he
did not think anyone needed to look after nynaeve; around nynaeve, to his
mind, other people needed someone to look after them.
he did not want to think about hopper. he was succeeding in keeping live
wolves out of his head, although at the price of feeling as if he had been
hammeredanddrawn by a hasty hand; he did not want to think a dead wolf
might be creeping in. he shook himself and forced his eyes wide open. not
even hopper.
there had been more reasons than bad dreams not to sleep well. they had
found other signs left by rands passage. between jarra and the river boern
there had been none perrin could see, but when they crossed the boern by a
stone bridge arching from one fiftyfoot river cliff to another, they had left
behind a town called sidon all in ashes. every building. only a few stone
walls and chimneys still stood among the ruins.
bedraggled townspeople said a lantern dropped in a barn had started it, and
then the fire seemed to run wild, and everything went wrong. half the buckets
that could be found had holes in them. every last burning wall had fallen
outward instead of in, setting houses to either side alight. flaming timbers
from the inn had somehow tumbled as far as the main well in the square, so
no one could draw more water from it to fight the fires, and houses had fallen
right on top of three other wells. even the wind had seemed to shift, fanning
the flames in every direction.
there had been no need to ask moiraine if rands presence had caused it;
her face, like cold iron, was answer enough. the pattern shaped itself around


 rand, and chance ran wild.
beyond sidon they had ridden through four small towns where only lans
tracking told them rand was still ahead. rand was afoot, now, and had been
for some time. they had found his horse back beyond jarra, dead, looking as
if it had been mauled by wolves, or dogs run wild. it had been hard for perrin
not to reach out, then, especially when moiraine looked up from the horse to
frown at him. luckily, lan had found the tracks of rands boots, running
from where the dead horse lay. one boot heel had a threecornered gouge
from a rock; it made his prints plain. but afoot or mounted, he seemed to be
staying ahead of them.
in the four villages after sidon, the biggest excitement anyone could
remember was seeing loial ride in, and discovering that he was an ogier, for
real and for true. they were so caught up with that, that they barely even
noticed perrins eyes, and when they did. . . . well, if ogier were real, then
men could very well have any color eyes at all.
but after those came a little place named willar, and it was celebrating. the
spring on the village common was flowing again, after a year of hauling water
a mile from a stream when all efforts at digging wells had failed and half the
people had moved away. willar would not die after all. three more untouched
villages had been followed in quick succession, all in one day, by samaha,
where every well in town had gone dry just the night before, and people were
muttering about the dark one; then tallan, where all the old arguments the
village had ever known had bubbled to the surface like overflowing cesspits a
morning earlier, and it had taken three murders to shock everyone back to his
senses; and finally fyall, where the crops this spring looked to be the poorest
anyone could remember, but the mayor, digging a new privy behind his
house, had found rotted leather sacks full of gold, so none would go hungry.
no one in fyall recognized the fat coins, with a womans face on one side and
an eagle on the other; moiraine said they had been minted in manetheren.
perrin had finally asked her about it, as they sat around their campfire one
night. after jarra, i thought. . . . they were all so happy, with their
weddings. even the whitecloaks were only made to look like fools. fyall was
all rightrand couldnt have had anything to do with their crops; they were
failing before he ever came, and that gold was surely good, with their need
but all this other. . . . that town burning, and the wells failing, and. . . . that is
evil, moiraine. i cant believe rand is evil. the pattern may be shaping itself
around him, but how can the pattern be that evil? it makes no sense, and
things have to make sense. if you make a tool with no sense to it, its wasted


 metal. the pattern wouldnt make waste.
lan gave him a wry look, and vanished into the darkness to make a circuit
around their campsite. loial, already stretched out in his blankets, lifted his
head to listen, ears pricking forward.
moiraine was silent for a time, warming her hands. finally she spoke while
staring into the flames. the creator is good, perrin. the father of lies is
evil. the pattern of age, the age lace itself, is neither. the pattern is what is.
the wheel of time weaves all lives into the pattern, all actions. a pattern that
is all one color is no pattern. for the pattern of an age, good and ill are the
warp and the woof.
even riding through lateafternoon sunshine three days later, perrin felt the
chill he had had on first hearing her say those words. he wanted to believe the
pattern was good. he wanted to believe that when men did evil things, they
were going against the pattern, distorting it. to him the pattern was a fine and
intricate creation made by a master smith. that it mixed pot metal and worse
in with good steel with never a care was a cold thought.
i care, he muttered softly. light, i do care. moiraine glanced back at
him, and he fell silent. he was not sure what the aes sedai cared about,
beyond rand.
a few minutes later lan appeared from ahead and swung his black war
horse in beside moiraines mare. remen lies just over the next hill, he said.
they have had an eventful day or two, it seems.
loials ears twitched once. rand?
the warder shook his head. i do not know. perhaps moiraine can say,
when she sees. the aes sedai gave him a searching look, then heeled her
white mare to a quicker step.
they topped the hill, and remen lay spread out below them, hard against
the river. the manetherendrelle stretched more than half a mile wide here,
and there was no bridge, though two crowded, barge like ferries crept across,
propelled by long oars, and one nearly empty was returning. three more
shared long stone docks with nearly a dozen river traders vessels, some with
one mast, some with two. a few bulky gray stone warehouses separated the
docks from the town itself, where the buildings seemed mostly of stone, as
well, though roofed in tiles of every color from yellow to red to purple, and
the streets ran every which way around a central square.
moiraine pulled up the deep hood of her cloak to hide her face before they


 rode down.
as usual, the people in the streets stared at loial, but this time perrin heard
awed murmurs of ogier. loial sat straighter in his saddle than he had in
some time, and his ears stood straight, and a smile just curled the ends of his
wide mouth. he was obviously trying not to let on that he was pleased, but he
looked like a cat having its ears scratched.
remen looked like any of a dozen towns to perrinit was full of manmade aromas and man smell; with a strong smell of the river, of courseand
he was wondering what lan could have meant when the hair on the back of
his neck stirred as he scented somethingwrong. as soon as his nose took it
in, it was gone like a horse hair dropped onto hot coals, but he remembered it.
he had smelled the same smell at jarra, and it had vanished the same way,
then. it was not a twisted one or a neverborntrolloc, burn me, not a
twisted one! not a neverborn! a myrddraal, a fade, a halfman, anything
but a neverborn!not a trolloc or a fade, yet the stench had been every bit
as sharp, every bit as vile. but whatever gave off that scent left no lasting
trail, it seemed.
they rode into the town square. one of the big paving blocks had been
pried up, right in the middle of the square, so a gibbet could be erected. a
single thick timber rose out of the dirt, supporting a braced crosspiece from
which hung an iron cage, the bottom of it four paces high. a tall man dressed
all in grays and browns sat in the cage, holding his knees under his chin. he
had no room to do otherwise. three small boys were pitching stones at him.
the man looked straight ahead, not flinching when a stone made it between
the bars. more than one trickle of blood stained his face. the townspeople
walking by paid no more mind to what the boys were doing than the man did,
though every last one of them looked at the cage, most of them with approval,
and some with fear.
moiraine made a sound in her throat that might have been disgust.
there is more, lan said. come. ive already arranged rooms at an inn. i
think you will find it interesting.
perrin looked back over his shoulder at the caged man as he rode after
them. there was something familiar about the man, but he could not place it.
they shouldnt do that. loials rumble sounded halfway to a snarl. the
children, i mean. the grownups should stop them.
they should, perrin agreed, barely paying attention. why is he familiar?


 the sign over the door of the inn lan led them to, nearer the river, read
waylands forge, which perrin took for a good omen, though there seemed to
be nothing of the smithy about the place except the leatheraproned man with
a hammer painted on the sign. it was a large, purpleroofed, threestory
building of squared and polished gray stones, with large windows and scrollcarved doors, and it had a prosperous look. stablemen came running to take
the horses, bowing even more deeply after lan tossed them coins.
inside, perrin stared at the people. the men and women at the tables were
all dressed in their feastday clothes, it seemed to him, with more embroidered
coats, more lace on dresses, more colored ribbons and fringed scarves, than he
had seen in a long time. only four men sitting at one table wore plain coats,
and they were the only ones who did not look up expectantly when perrin and
the others walked in. the four men kept on talking softly. he could make out
a little of what they were saying, about the virtues of ice peppers over furs as
cargo and what the troubles in saldaea might have done to prices. captains of
trading ships, he decided. the others seemed to be local folk. even the
serving women appeared to be wearing their best, their long aprons covering
embroidered dresses with bits of lace at the neck.
the kitchen was working heavily; he could smell mutton, lamb, chicken,
and beef, as well as some sort of vegetables. and a spicy cake that made him
forget meat for a moment.
the innkeeper himself met them just inside, a plump, baldheaded man
with shining brown eyes in a smooth pink face, bowing and drywashing his
hands. if he had not come to them, perrin would never have taken him for the
landlord, for instead of the expected white apron, he wore a coat like
everyone else, all whiteandgreen embroidery on stout blue wool that had the
man sweating with its weight.
why are they all wearing clothes for festival? perrin wondered.
ah, master andra, the innkeeper said, addressing lan. and an ogier,
just as you said. not that i doubted, of course. not with all thats happened,
and never your word, master. why not an ogier? ah, friend ogier, to be
having you in the house gives me more pleasure than you can be knowing.
tis a fine thing, and a fitting cap to it all. ah, and mistress. . . . his eyes
took in the deep blue silk of her dress and the rich wool of her cloak, dusty
from travel but still fine. forgive me, lady, please. his bow bent him like a
horseshoe. master andra did not make your station clear, lady. i meant no
disrespect. you are even more welcome than friend ogier here, of course,
lady. please, take no offense at gainor furlans poor tongue.


 i take none. moiraines voice calmly accepted the title furlan gave her. it
was far from the first time the aes sedai had gone under another name, or
pretended to be something she was not. it was not the first perrin had heard
lan name himself andra, either. the deep hood still hid moiraines smooth
aes sedai features, and she held her cloak around her with one hand as if
taken with a chill. not the hand on which she wore her great serpent ring.
you have had strange occurrences in the town, innkeeper, so i understand.
nothing to trouble travelers, i trust.
ah, lady, you might be calling them strange indeed. your own radiant
presence is more than enough to honor this humble house, lady, and bringing
an ogier with you, but we have hunters in remen, too. right here in
waylands forge, they are. hunters for the horn of valere, set out from illian
for adventure. and adventure they found, lady, here in remen, or just a mile
or two upriver, fighting wild aielmen, of all things. can you imagine blackveiled aiel savages in altara, lady?
aiel. now perrin knew what was familiar about the man in the cage. he
had seen an aiel, once, one of those fierce, nearly legendary denizens of the
harsh land called the waste. the man had looked a good deal like rand, taller
than most, with gray eyes and reddish hair, and he had been dressed like the
man in the cage, all in browns and grays that would fade into rock or brush,
with soft boots laced to his knees. perrin could almost hear mins voice again.
an aielman in a cage. a turning point in your life, or something important
that will happen.
why do you have . . . ? he stopped to clear his throat so he would not
sound so hoarse. how did an aiel come to be caged in your town square?
ah, young master, that is a story to. . . . furlan trailed off, eyeing him up
and down, taking in his plain country clothes and the longbow in his hands,
pausing over the axe at his belt opposite his quiver. the plump man gave a
start when his study reached perrins face, as if, with a lady and an ogier
present, he had just now noticed perrins yellow eyes. he would be your
servant, master andra? he asked cautiously.
answer him, was all lan said.
ah. ah, of course, master andra. but heres who can tell it better than
myself. tis lord orban, himself. tis he we have gathered to hear.
a darkhaired, youngish man in a red coat, with a bandage wound around
his temples, was making his way down the stairs at the side of the common
room using padded crutches, the left leg of his breeches cut away so more


 bandages could strap his calf from ankle to knee. the townspeople murmured
as if seeing something wondrous. the ship captains went on with their quiet
talking; they had come round to furs. furlan might have thought the man in
the red coat could tell the story better, but he went ahead himself. lord
orban and lord gann faced twenty wild aielmen with only ten retainers. ah,
fierce was the fighting and hard, with many wounds given and received. six
good retainers died, and every man took hurts, lord orban and lord gann
worst of all, but every aiel they slew, save those who fled, and one they took
prisoner. tis that one you see out there in the square, where hell not be
troubling the countryside anymore with his savage ways, no more than the
dead ones will.
you have had trouble from aiel in this district? moiraine asked.
perrin was wondering the same thing, with no little consternation. if some
people still occasionally used blackveiled aiel as a term for someone
violent, it was testimony to the impression the aiel war had left, but that was
twenty years in the past, now, and the aiel had never come out of the waste
before or since. but i saw one this side of the spine of the world, and now ive
seen two.
the innkeeper rubbed at his bald head. ah. ah, no, lady, not exactly. but
we would have had, you can be sure, with twenty savages loose. why,
everyone remembers how they killed and looted and burned their way across
cairhien. men from this very village marched to the battle of the shining
walls, when the nations gathered to throw them back. i myself suffered from
a twisted back at the time and so could not go, but i remember well, as we all
do. how they came here, so far from their own land, or why, i do not know,
but lord orban and lord gann saved us from them. there was a murmur of
agreement from the folk in feastday clothes.
orban himself came stumping across the common room, not seeming to see
anyone but the innkeeper. perrin could smell stale wine before he was even
close. wheres that old woman taken herself off to with her herbs, furlan?
orban demanded roughly. ganns wounds are paining him, and my head
feels about to split open.
furlan almost bent his head to the floor. ah, mother leich will be back in
the morning, lord orban. a birthing, lord. but she said shed stitched and
poulticed your wounds, and lord ganns, so thered be no worrying. ah,
lord orban, im sure shell be seeing to you first thing on the morrow.
the bandaged man muttered something under his breathunder his breath


 to any ears but perrinsabout waiting on a farmwife throwing her litter
and something else about being sewn up like a sack of meal. he shifted
sullen, angry eyes, and for the first time appeared to see the newcomers.
perrin, he dismissed immediately, which did not surprise perrin at all. his
eyes widened a little at loialhes seen ogier, perrin thought, but he never
thought to see one herenarrowed a bit at lanhe knows a fighting man
when he sees one, and he does not like seeing oneand brightened as he
stooped to peer inside moiraines hood, though he was not close enough to
see her face.
perrin decided not to think anything at all about that, not concerning an aes
sedai, and he hoped neither moiraine nor lan thought anything of it, either. a
light in the warders eyes told him he had missed on that hope, at least.
twelve of you fought twenty aiel? lan asked in a flat voice.
orban straightened, wincing. in an elaborately casual tone, he said, aye,
you must expect things such as that when you seek the horn of valere. it was
not the first such encounter for gann and me, nor will it be the last before we
find the horn. if the light shines on us. he sounded as if the light could not
possibly do anything else. not all our fights have been with aiel, of course,
but there are always those who would stop hunters, if they could. gann and i,
we do not stop easily. another approving murmur came from the
townspeople. orban stood a little straighter.
you lost six, and took one prisoner. from lans voice, it was not clear if
that was a good exchange or a poor one.
aye, orban said, we slew the rest, save those who ran. no doubt theyre
hiding their dead now; ive heard they do that. the whitecloaks are out
searching for them, but theyll never find them.
there are whitecloaks here? perrin asked sharply.
orban glanced at him, and dismissed him once more. the man addressed
lan again. whitecloaks always put their noses in where they are not wanted
or needed. incompetent louts, all of them. aye, theyll ride all over the
countryside for days, but i doubt theyll find as much as their own shadows.
i suppose they wont, lan said.
the bandaged man frowned as if unsure exactly what lan meant, then
rounded on the innkeeper again. you find that old woman, hear! my head is
splitting. with a last glance at lan, he hobbled away, climbing back up the
stairs one at a time, followed by murmurs of admiration for a hunter of the


 horn who had slain aielmen.
this is an eventful town. loials deep voice drew every eye to him.
except for the ship captains, who seemed to be discussing rope, as near as
perrin could make out. everywhere i go, you humans are doing things,
hurrying and scurrying, having things happen to you. how can you stand so
much excitement?
ah, friend ogier, furlan said,  tis the way of us humans to want
excitement. how much i regret not being able to march to the shining walls.
why, let me tell you
our rooms. moiraine did not raise her voice, but her words cut the
innkeeper short like a sharp knife. andra did arrange rooms, did he not?
ah, lady, forgive me. yes, master andra did indeed hire rooms. forgive
me, please. tis all the excitement, makes my head empty itself. please
forgive me, lady. this way, if you please. if youll please to follow me.
bowing and scraping, apologizing and babbling without pause, furlan led
them up the stairs.
at the top, perrin paused to look back. he heard the murmurs of lady
and ogier down there, could feel all those eyes, but it seemed to him that he
felt one pair of eyes in particular, someone staring not at moiraine and loial,
but at him.
he picked her out immediately. for one thing, she stood apart from the
others, and for another she was the only woman in the room not wearing at
least a little lace. her dark gray, almost black, dress was as plain as the ship
captains clothes, with wide sleeves and narrow skirts, and never a frill or
stitch of fancywork. the dress was divided for riding, he saw when she
moved, and she wore soft boots that peeked out under the hem. she was
youngno older than he was, perhapsand tall for a woman, with black hair
to her shoulders. a nose that just missed being too large and too bold, a
generous mouth, high cheekbones, and dark, slightly tilted eyes. he could not
quite decide whether she was beautiful or not.
as soon as he looked down, she turned to address one of the serving
women and did not glance at the stairs again, but he was sure he had been
right. she had been staring at him.


  c h a p t e r
3 4


a different dance


furlan burbled on as he showed them to their rooms, though perrin did not
really listen. he was too busy wondering if the blackhaired girl knew what
yellow eyes meant. burn me, she was looking at me. then he heard the
innkeeper say the words proclaiming the dragon in ghealdan, and he
thought his ears would go to sharp points like loials.
moiraine stopped dead in the doorway to her room. there is another false
dragon, innkeeper? in ghealdan? the hood of her cloak still hid her face,
but she sounded shaken to her toes. even listening for the mans reply, perrin
could not help staring at her; he smelled something close to fear.
ah, lady, never you fear. tis a hundred leagues to ghealdan, and none
will trouble you here, not with master andra about, and lord orban and lord
gann. why
answer her! lan said harshly. is there a false dragon in ghealdan?
ah. ah, no, master andra, not precisely. i said theres a man proclaiming
the dragon in ghealdan, so we heard a few days gone. preaching his coming,
you might say. talking about that fellow over in tarabon weve heard about.
though some do say tis arad doman, not tarabon. a long way from here, in
any case. why, any other day, i expect wed talk more of that than anything
else, except maybe the wild tales about hawkwings army come back
lans cold eyes might as well have been knife blades from the way furlan
swallowed and scrubbed his hands faster. i only know what i hear, master
andra. tis said the fellow has a stare can pin you where you stand, and he
talks all sorts of rubbish about the dragon coming to save us, and we all have
to follow, and even the beasts will fight for the dragon. i dont know whether


 theyve arrested him yet or not. tis likely; the ghealdanin would not put up
long with that kind of talk.
masema, perrin thought wonderingly. its bloody masema.
you are right, innkeeper, lan said. this fellow isnt likely to trouble us
here. i knew a fellow once who liked to make wild speeches. you remember
him, lady alys, dont you? masema?
moiraine gave a start. masema. yes. of course. i had put him out of my
mind. her voice firmed. when next i see masema, he will wish someone
had peeled his hide to make boots. she slammed the door behind her so hard
that the crash echoed down the hallway.
keep a quiet! came a muffled shout from the far end. my head is
splitting!
ah. furlan washed his hands in one direction, then rubbed them in the
other. ah. forgive me, master andra, but lady alys is a fiercesounding
woman.
only with those who displease her, lan said blandly. her bite is far
worse than her bark.
ah. ah. ah. your rooms are this way. ah, friend ogier, when master
andra told me you were coming, i had an old ogier bed brought from the
attic where it has been gathering dust these three hundred years or more. why,
tis. . . .
perrin let the words wash over him, hearing them no more than a river rock
hears the water. the blackhaired young woman worried him. and the caged
aiel.
once in his own rooma small one in the back; lan had done nothing to
disabuse the innkeeper of the notion that perrin was a servanthe moved
mechanically, still wrapped in thought. he unstrung his bow and propped it in
the cornerkeeping it strung too long ruined bow and string alikeset down
his blanketroll and saddlebags beside the washstand and threw his cloak
across them. he hung his belts with quiver and axe from pegs on the wall, and
nearly lay down on the bed before a jawcracking yawn reminded him how
dangerous that might be. the bed was narrow, and the mattress appeared to be
all lumps; it looked more inviting than any bed he could remember. he sat on
the threelegged stool, instead, and thought. always he liked to think things
through.
after a time, loial rapped on the door and put his head in. the ogiers ears


 practically quivered with excitement, and his grin very nearly split his broad
face in two. perrin, you will not believe it! my bed is sung wood! why, it
must be well over a thousand years old. no treesinger has sung a piece so
large in at least that long. i myself would not care to try it, and i have the
talent more strongly than most, now. well, to be truthful, there are not many
of us with the talent at all, anymore. but i am among the best of those who
can sing wood.
that is very interesting, perrin said. an aiel in a cage. that is what min
said. why was that girl staring at me?
i thought it was. loial sounded a little put out that he did not share the
ogiers excitement, but all perrin wanted to do was think. supper is ready
below, perrin. they have prepared their finest in case the hunters want
anything, but we can have some.
you go on, loial. im not hungry. the smells of cooking meat floating up
from the kitchen did not interest him. he hardly noticed loial going.
hands on his knees, yawning now and again, he tried to work it out. it
seemed like one of those puzzles master luhhan made, the metal pieces
appearing to be linked inextricably. but there was always a trick to make the
iron loops and whirls come apart, and there had to be here, too.
the girl had been looking at him. his eyes might explain that, except that
the innkeeper had ignored them, and no one else had even noticed. they had
an ogier to look at, and hunters of the horn in the house, and a lady visiting,
and an aiel caged in the square. nothing as small as the color of a mans eyes
could seize their attention; nothing about a servant could compete with the
rest. so why did she pick me to stare at?
and the aiel in the cage. what min saw was always important. but how?
what was he supposed to do? i could have stopped those children throwing
rocks. i should have. it was no use telling himself the adults would certainly
have told him to go on about his business, that he was a stranger in remen
and the aiel was none of his concern. i should have tried.
no answers came to him, so he went back to the beginning and patiently
worked through it once more, then again, and again. still he found nothing
except regret for what he had not done.
it came to him after a time that night had finally fallen. the room was dark
except for a little moonlight through the lone window. he thought about the
tallow candle and the tinderbox he had seen on the mantel over the narrow
fireplace, but there was more than enough light for his eyes. i have to do


 something, dont i?
he buckled on his axe, then paused. he had done it without thinking;
wearing the thing had become as natural as breathing. he did not like that.
but he left the belt around his waist, and went out.
light from the stairs made the hallway seem almost bright after his room.
talk and laughter drifted up from the common room, and cooking smells from
the kitchen. he strode toward the front of the inn, to moiraines room,
knocked once, and went in. and stopped, his face burning.
moiraine pulled the pale blue robe that hung from her shoulders around
herself. you wish something? she asked coolly. she had a silverbacked
hairbrush in one hand, and her dark hair, spilling down her neck in dark
waves, glistened as if she had been brushing it. her room was far finer than
his, with polished wooden paneling on the walls and silverchased lamps and
a warm fire on the wide brick hearth. the air smelled of rosescented soap.
i. . . . i thought lan was here, he managed to get out. you two always
have your heads together, and i thought hed. . . . i thought. . . .
what do you want, perrin?
he took a deep breath. is this rands doing? i know lan followed him
here, and it all seems oddthe hunters, and aielbut did he do it?
i do not think so. i will know more when lan tells me what he discovers
tonight. with luck, what he finds will help with the choice i must make.
a choice?
rand could have crossed the river and be on his way to tear crosscountry. or he could have taken ship downriver to illian, meaning to board
another there for tear. the journey is leagues longer that way, but days
faster.
i dont think we are going to catch him, moiraine. i dont know how hes
doing it, but even afoot he is staying ahead of us. if lan is right, he is still half
a day ahead.
i could almost suspect he had learned to travel, moiraine said with a
small frown, except that if he had, he would have gone straight to tear. no,
he has the blood of long walkers and strong runners in him. but we may take
the river anyway. if i cannot catch him, i will be in tear close behind him. or
waiting for him.
perrin shifted his feet uneasily; there was cold promise in her voice. you


 told me once that you could sense a darkfriend, one who was far gone into
the shadow, at least. lan, too. have you sensed anything like that here?
she gave a loud sniff and turned back to a tall standing mirror with finely
made silverwork set in the legs. holding her robe closed with one hand, she
ran the brush through her hair with the other. very few humans are so far
gone as that, perrin, even among the worst darkfriends. the brush halted in
midstroke. why do you ask?
there was a girl down in the common room staring at me. not at you and
loial, like everybody else. at me.
the brush resumed motion, and a smile briefly touched moiraines lips.
you sometimes forget, perrin, that you are a goodlooking young man. some
girls admire a pair of shoulders. he grunted and shuffled his feet. was there
something else, perrin?
uh . . . no. she could not help with mins viewing, not beyond telling
him what he already knew, that it was important. and he did not want to tell
her what min had seen. or that min had seen anything, for that matter.
back out in the hall with the door closed, he leaned against the wall for a
moment. light, just walking in on her like that, and her. . . . she was a pretty
woman. and likely old enough to be my mother, or more. he thought mat
would probably have asked her down to the common room to dance. no, he
wouldnt. even mat isnt fool enough to try charming an aes sedai. moiraine
did dance. he had danced with her once himself. and nearly fallen over his
own feet with every other step. stop thinking about her like a village girl just
because you saw. . . . shes bloody aes sedai! you have that aiel to worry
about. he gave himself a shake and went downstairs.
the common room was full as it could be, with every chair taken, and
stools and benches brought in, and those who had nowhere to sit standing
along the walls. he did not see the blackhaired girl, and no one else looked at
him twice as he hurriedly crossed the room.
orban occupied a table to himself, his bandaged leg propped up on a chair
with a cushion, with a soft slipper on that foot, a silver goblet in his hand, the
serving women keeping it filled with wine. aye, he was saying to the whole
room, we knew the aiel for fierce fighters, gann and i, but there was no
time to hesitate. i drew my sword, and dug my heels into lions ribs. . . .
perrin gave a start before he realized the man meant his horse was named
lion. wouldnt put it past him to say he was riding a lion. he felt a little
ashamed; just because he did not like the man was no reason to suppose the


 hunter would take his boasting that far. he hurried on outside without looking
back.
the street in front of the inn was as crowded as inside, with people who
could not find a place in the common room peering in through the windows,
and twice as many huddling around the doors to listen to orbans tale. no one
glanced at perrin twice, though his passage brought muttered complaints from
those jostled a little further from the door.
everyone who was out in the night must have been at the inn, for he saw no
one as he walked to the square. sometimes the shadow of a person moved
across a lighted window, but that was all. he had the feel of being watched,
though, and looked around uneasily. nothing but nightcloaked streets dotted
with glowing windows. around the square, most of the windows were dark
except a few on upper floors.
the gibbet stood as he remembered, the manthe aielstill in the cage,
hanging higher than he could reach. the aiel seemed to be awakeat least
his head was upbut he never looked down at perrin. the stones the children
had been throwing were scattered beneath the cage.
the cage hung from a thick rope tied to a ring on one of the upper bars and
running through a heavy pulley on the crosspiece down to a pair of stubs,
waisthigh from the bottom of the upright on either side. the excess rope lay
in a careless tangle of coils at the foot of the gibbet.
perrin looked around again, searching the dark square. he still had the feel
of being watched, but he still saw nothing. he listened, and heard nothing. he
smelled chimney smoke and cooking from the houses, and mansweat and old
blood from the man in the cage. there was no fear scent from him.
his weight, and then theres the cage, he thought as he moved closer to the
gibbet. he did not know when he had decided to do this, or even if he really
had decided, but he knew he was going to do it.
hooking a leg around the heavy upright, he heaved on the rope, hoisting
the cage enough to gain a little slack. the way the rope jerked told him the
man in the cage had finally moved, but he was in too much of a hurry to stop
and tell him what he was doing. the slack let him unwind the rope from
around the stubs. still bracing himself with his leg around the upright, he
quickly lowered the cage hand over hand to the paving blocks.
the aiel was looking at him now, studying him silently. perrin said
nothing. when he got a good look at the cage, his mouth tightened. if a thing
was made, even a thing like this, it should be made well. the entire front of


 the cage was a door, on rude hinges made by a hasty hand, held by a good
iron lock on a chain as badly wrought as the cage. he fumbled the chain
around until he found the worst link, then jammed the thick spike on his axe
through it. a sharp twist of his wrist forced the link open. in seconds he
separated the chain, rattled it free, and swung open the front of the cage.
the aiel sat there, knees yet under his chin, staring at him.
well? perrin whispered hoarsely. i opened it, but im not going to
bloody carry you. he looked hastily around the nightdark square. still
nothing moved, but he still had the feel of eyes watching.
you are strong, wetlander. the aiel did not move beyond working his
shoulders. it took three men to hoist me up there. and now you bring me
down. why?
i dont like seeing people in cages, perrin whispered. he wanted to go.
the cage was open, and those eyes were watching. but the aiel was not
moving. if you do a thing, do it right. will you get out of there before
somebody comes?
the aiel grasped the frontmost overhead bar of the cage, heaved himself
out and to his feet in one motion, then half hung there, supporting himself
with his grip on the bar. he would have been nearly a head taller than perrin,
standing straight. he glanced at perrins eyesperrin knew how they must
shine, burnished gold in the moonlightbut he did not mention them. i have
been in there since yesterday, wetlander. he sounded like lan. not that their
voices or accents were anything alike, but the aiel had that same unruffled
coolness, that same calm sureness. it will take a moment for my legs to
work. i am gaul, of the imran sept of the shaarad aiel, wetlander. i am
shaeen mtaal, a stone dog. my water is yours.
well, i am perrin aybara. of the two rivers. im a blacksmith. the man
was out of the cage; he could go now. only, if anyone came along before gaul
could walk, he would be right back into the cage unless they killed him, and
either way would waste perrins work. if i had thought, id have brought a
waterbottle, or a skin. why do you call me wetlander?
gaul gestured toward the river; even perrins eyes could not be sure in the
moonlight, but he thought the aiel looked uneasy for the first time. three
days ago, i watched a girl sporting in a huge pool of water. it must have been
twenty paces across. she . . . pulled herself out into it. he made an awkward
swimming gesture with one hand. a brave girl. crossing these . . . rivers . . .
has nearly unmanned me. i never thought there could be such a thing as too


 much water, but i never thought there was so much water in the world as you
wetlanders have.
perrin shook his head. he knew the aiel waste held little waterit was
one of the few things he knew about the waste or the aielbut he had not
thought it could be scarce enough to cause this reaction. youre a long way
from home, gaul. why are you here?
we search, gaul said slowly. we look for he who comes with the
dawn.
perrin had heard that name before, under circumstances that made him sure
who it meant. light, it always comes back to rand. i am tied to him like a
mean horse for shoeing. you are looking in the wrong direction, gaul. im
looking for him, too, and he is on his way to tear.
tear? the aiel sounded surprised. why . . . ? but it must be. prophecy
says when the stone of tear falls, we will leave the threefold land at last.
that was the aiel name for the waste. it says we will be changed, and find
again what was ours, and was lost.
that may be. i dont know your prophecies, gaul. are you about ready to
leave? somebody could come any minute.
it is too late to run, gaul said, and a deep voice shouted, the savage is
lose! ten or a dozen whitecloaked men came running across the square,
drawing swords, their conical helmets shining in the moonlight. children of
the light.
as if he had all the time in the world, gaul calmly lifted a dark cloth from
his shoulders and wrapped it around his head, finishing with a thick black veil
that hid his face except for his eyes. do you like to dance, perrin aybara?
he asked. with that, he darted away from the cage. straight at the oncoming
whitecloaks.
for an instant they were caught by surprise, but an instant was apparently
all the aiel needed. he kicked the sword out of the grip of the first to reach
him, then his stiffened hand struck like a dagger at the whitecloaks throat,
and he slid around the soldier as he fell. the next mans arm made a loud snap
as gaul broke it. he pushed that man under the feet of a third, and kicked a
fourth in the face. it was like a dance, from one to the next without stopping
or slowing, though the tripped fellow was climbing back to his feet, and the
one with the broken arm had shifted his sword. gaul danced on in the midst
of them.


 perrin had only an amazed moment himself, for not all the whitecloaks had
put their attentions on the aiel. barely in time, he gripped the axe haft with
both hands to block a sword thrust, swung . . . and wanted to cry out as the
halfmoon blade tore the mans throat. but he had no time for crying out,
none for regrets; more whitecloaks followed before the first fell. he hated the
gaping wounds the axe made, hated the way it chopped through mail to rend
flesh beneath, split helmet and skull with almost equal ease. he hated it all.
but he did not want to die.
time seemed to compress and stretch out, both at once. his body felt as if
he fought for hours, and breath rasped raw in his throat. men seemed to move
as though floating through jelly. they seemed to leap in an instant from where
they started to where they fell. sweat rolled down his face, yet he felt as cold
as quenching water. he fought for his life, and he could not have said whether
it lasted seconds or all night.
when he finally stood, panting and nearly stunned, looking at a dozen
whitecloaked men lying on the paving blocks of the square, the moon
appeared not to have moved at all. some of the men groaned; others lay silent
and still. gaul stood among them, still veiled, still emptyhanded. most of the
men down were his work. perrin wished they all were, and felt ashamed. the
smell of blood and death was sharp and bitter.
you do not dance the spears badly, perrin aybara.
head spinning, perrin muttered, i dont see how twelve men fought
twenty of you and won, even if two of them are hunters.
is that what they say? gaul laughed softly. sarien and i were careless,
being so long in these soft lands, and the wind was from the wrong direction,
so we smelled nothing. we walked into them before we knew it. well, sarien
is dead, and i was caged like a fool, so perhaps we paid enough. it is time for
running now, wetlander. tear; i will remember it. at last he lowered the
black veil. may you always find water and shade, perrin aybara. turning,
he ran into the night.
perrin started to run, too, then realized he had a bloody axe in his hands.
hastily he wiped the curved blade on a dead mans cloak. hes dead, burn me,
and theres blood on it already. he made himself put the haft back through the
loop on his belt before he broke into a trot.
at his second step he saw her, a slim shape at the edge of the square, in
dark, narrow skirts. she turned to run; he could see they were divided for
riding. she darted back into the street and vanished.


 lan met him before he reached the place where she had been standing. the
warder took in the cage sitting empty beneath the gibbet, the shadowed white
mounds that caught the moonlight, and he tossed his head as if he were about
to erupt. in a voice as tight and hard as a new wheel rim, he said, is this your
work, blacksmith? the light burn me! is there anyone who can connect it to
you?
a girl, perrin said. i think she saw. i dont want you to hurt her, lan!
plenty of others could have seen, too. there are lighted windows all around.
the warder grabbed perrins coat sleeve and gave him a push toward the
inn. i saw a girl running, but i thought. . . . no matter. you dig the ogier out
and haul him down to the stable. after this, we need to get our horses to the
docks as quickly as possible. the light alone knows if there is a ship sailing
tonight, or what ill have to pay to hire one if there isnt. dont ask questions,
blacksmith! do it! run!


 c h a p t e r
3 5


the falcon


the warders long legs outdistanced perrins, and by the time he pushed
through the throng outside the inn doors, lan was already striding up the
stairs, not seeming in any particular hurry. perrin made himself walk as
slowly. from the doorway behind him came grumbles about people pushing
ahead of other people.
again? orban was saying, holding his silver cup up to be refilled. aye,
very well. they lay in ambush close beside the road we traveled, and an
ambush i did not expect so close to remen. screaming, they rushed upon us
from the crowding brush. in a breath they were in our midst, their spears
stabbing, slaying two of my best men and one of ganns immediately. aye, i
knew aiel when i saw them, and. . . .
perrin hurried up the stairs. well, orban knows them now.
voices came from behind moiraines door. he did not want to hear what
she had to say about this. he hurried past to stick his head into loials room.
the ogier bed was a low, massive thing, twice as long and half as wide as
any human bed perrin had ever seen. it took up much of the room, and that
was as large and as fine as moiraines. perrin vaguely remembered loial
saying something about it being sung wood, and at any other time he might
have stopped to admire those flowing curves that made it seem as if the bed
had somehow grown where it stood. ogier really must have stopped in remen
at some time in the past, for the innkeeper had also found a wooden armchair
that fit loial, and filled it with cushions. the ogier was comfortably sitting
on them in his shirt and breeches, idly scratching a bare ankle with a toenail
as he wrote in a large, clothbound book on an arm of the chair.


 were leaving! perrin said.
loial gave a jump, nearly upsetting his ink bottle and almost dropping the
book. leaving? we only just arrived, he rumbled.
yes, leaving. meet us at the stable as quickly as you can. and dont let
anyone see you go. i think theres a back stair that runs down by the kitchen.
the smell of food at his end of the hall had been too strong for there not to be.
the ogier gave one regretful look at the bed, then started tugging on his
high boots. but why?
the whitecloaks, perrin said. ill tell you more later. he ducked back
out before loial could ask any more.
he had not unpacked. once he had belted on his quiver, slung his cloak
around him, tossed blanketroll and saddlebags on his shoulder, and picked up
his bow, there was no sign he had ever been there. not a wrinkle in the folded
blankets at the foot of the bed, not a splash of water in the cracked basin on
the washstand. even the tallow candle still had a fresh wick, he realized. i
must have known i would not be staying. i dont seem to leave any mark
behind me, of late.
as he has suspected, a narrow stair at the back led down to a hall that ran
out past the kitchen. he peered cautiously into the kitchen. a spit dog trotted
in his big wicker wheel, turning a long spit that held a haunch of lamb, a large
piece of beef, five chickens, and a goose. fragrant steam rose from a soup
cauldron hanging from a sturdy crane over a second hearth. but there was not
a cook to be seen, nor any living soul except the dog. thankful for orbans
lies, he hurried on into the night.
the stable was a large structure of the same stone as the inn, though only
the stone faces around the big doors had been polished. a single lantern
hanging from a stallpost gave a dim light. stepper and the other horses stood
in stalls near the doors; loials big mount nearly filled his. the smell of hay
and horses was familiar and comforting. perrin was the first to arrive.
there was only one stableman on duty, a narrowfaced fellow in a dirty
shirt, with lanky gray hair, who demanded to know who perrin was to order
four horses saddled, and who was his master, and what he was doing all
bundled up to travel in the middle of the night, and did master furlan know
he was sneaking off like this, and what did he have hidden in those
saddlebags, and what was wrong with his eyes, was he sick?
a coin flipped through the air from behind perrin, glinting gold in the


 lantern light. the stableman snagged it with one hand and bit it.
saddle them, lan said. his voice was soft, as cold iron is soft, and the
stableman bobbed a bow and scurried to make the horses ready.
moiraine and loial came into the stable just as they could take up their
reins, and then they were all leading their horses behind lan, off down a street
that ran behind the stable toward the river. the soft clop of the horses hooves
on the paving blocks attracted only a slatribbed dog that barked once and ran
away as they went by.
this brings back memories, doesnt it, perrin? loial said, quietly for him.
keep your voice down, perrin whispered. what memories?
why, it is like old times. the ogier had managed to mute his voice; he
sounded like a bumblebee only the size of a dog instead of a horse. sneaking
away in the night, with enemies behind us, and maybe enemies ahead, and
danger in the air, and the cold tang of adventure.
perrin frowned at loial over steppers saddle. it was easy enough; his eyes
cleared the saddle, and loial stood head and shoulders and chest above it on
the other side. what are you talking about? i believe you are coming to like
danger! loial, you must be crazy!
i am only fixing the mood in my head, loial said, sounding formal. or
perhaps defensive. for my book. i have to put it all in. i believe i am coming
to like it. adventuring. of course, i am. his ears gave two violent twitches.
i have to like it if i wish to write of it.
perrin shook his head.
at the stone wharves the barge like ferries lay snugged for the night, still
and dark, as did most of the ships. lantern lights and people moved around on
the dock alongside a twomasted vessel, though, and on the deck as well. the
main smells were tar and rope, with strong hints of fish, though something
back in the nearest warehouse gave off sharp, spicy aromas that the others
nearly submerged.
lan located the captain, a short, slight man with an odd way of holding his
head tilted to one side while he listened. the bargaining was over soon
enough, and booms and sling rigged to hoist the horses aboard. perrin kept a
close eye on the horses, talking to them; horses had little tolerance for the
unusual, such as being lifted into the air, but even the warders stallion
seemed soothed by his murmurs.


 lan gave gold to the captain, and silver to two sailors who ran barefoot to a
warehouse for sacks of oats. more crewmen tethered the horses between the
masts in a sort of small pen made of rope, all the while muttering about the
mess they would have to clean. perrin did not think anyone was supposed to
overhear, but his ears caught the words. the men were just not used to horses.
in short order the snow goose was ready to sail, only a little ahead of what
the captainhis name was jaim adarrahad intended. lan led moiraine
below as the lines were cast off, and loial followed yawning. perrin stayed at
the railing near the bow, though the ogiers every yawn had summoned one
of his own. he wondered if the snow goose could outrun wolves down the
river, outrun dreams. men began readying the sweeps to push the vessel away
from the wharf.
as the last line was tossed ashore and seized by a dockman, a girl in
narrow, divided skirts burst out of the shadows between two warehouses, a
bundle in her arms and a dark cloak streaming behind her. she leaped onto the
deck just as the men at the sweeps began pushing off.
adarra bustled from his place by the tiller, but she calmly set down her
bundle and said briskly, i will take passage downriver . . . oh . . . say, as far
as he is going. she nodded toward perrin without looking at him. ive no
objections to sleeping on deck. cold and wet do not bother me.
a few minutes of bargaining followed. she passed over three silver marks,
frowned at the coppers she got back, then stuffed them into her purse and
came forward to stand beside perrin.
she had an herbal scent to her, light and fresh and clean. those dark, tilted
eyes regarded him over high cheekbones, then turned to look back toward
shore. she was about his own age, he decided; he could not decide if her nose
fit her face, or dominated it. you are a fool, perrin aybara. why care what she
looks like?
the gap to the wharf was a good twenty paces, now; the sweeps dug in,
cutting white furrows in black water. for a moment he considered tossing her
over the side.
well, she said after a moment, i never expected my travels to take me
back to illian so soon as this. her voice was high, and she had a flat way of
speaking, but it was not unpleasant. you are going to illian, are you not? he
tightened his mouth. dont sulk, she said. you left quite a mess back there,
you and that aielman between you. the uproar was just beginning when i
left.


 you did not tell them? he said in surprise.
the townsfolk think the aielman chewed through the chain, or broke it
with his bare hands. they had not decided which when i left. she made a
sound suspiciously like a giggle. orban was quite loud in his disgust that his
wounds would keep him from hunting down the aielman personally.
perrin snorted. if he ever sees an aiel again, hell bloody soil himself. he
cleared his throat and muttered, sorry.
i do not know about that, she said, as if his remark had been nothing out
of the way. i saw him in jehannah during the winter. he fought four men
together, killed two and made the other two yield. of course, he started the
fight, so that takes something away from it, but they knew what they were
doing. he did not pick a fight with men who could not defend themselves.
still, he is a fool. he has these peculiar ideas about the great blackwood.
what some call the forest of shadows. have you ever heard of it?
he eyed her sideways. she spoke of fighting and killing as calmly as
another woman might speak of baking. he had never heard of any great
blackwood, but the forest of shadows lay just south of the two rivers. are
you following me? you were staring at me, back at the inn. why? and why
didnt you tell them what you saw?
an ogier, she said, staring at the river, is obviously an ogier, and the
others were not much more difficult to figure out. i managed a much better
look inside lady alyss hood than orban did, and her face makes that stonefaced fellow a warder. the light burn me if id want that one angry with me.
does he always look like that, or did he eat a rock for his last meal? anyway,
that left only you. i do not like things i cannot account for.
once again he considered tossing her over the side. seriously, this time.
but remen was now only a blotch of light well behind them in the darkness,
and no telling how far it was to shore.
she seemed to take his silence as an urging to go on. so there i have
anshe looked around, then dropped her voice, though the closest crewman
was working a sweep ten feet awayan aes sedai, a warder, an ogierand
you. a countryman, by first look at you. her tilted eyes rose to study his
yellow ones intentlyhe refused to look awayand she smiled. only you
free a caged aielman, hold a long talk with him, then help him chop a dozen
whitecloaks into sausage. i assume you do this regularly; you certainly
looked as if it were nothing out of the ordinary for you. i scent something
strange in a party of travelers such as yours, and strange trails are what


 hunters look for.
he blinked; there was no mistaking that emphasis. a hunter? you? you
cannot be a hunter. youre a girl.
her smile became so innocent that he almost walked away from her. she
stepped back, made a flourish with each hand, and was holding two knives as
neatly as old thom merrilin could have done it. one of the men at the sweeps
made a choking sound, and two others stumbled; sweeps thrashed and
tangled, and the snow goose lurched a little before the captains shouts set
things right. by that time, the blackhaired girl had made the knives disappear
again.
nimble fingers and nimble wits will take you a good deal further than a
sword and muscles. sharp eyes help, as well, but fortunately, i have these
things.
and modesty, as well, perrin murmured. she did not seem to notice.
i took the oath and received the blessing in the great square of tammaz,
in illian. perhaps i was the youngest, but in that crowd, with all the trumpets
and drums and cymbals and shouting. . . . a sixyearold could have taken the
oath, and none would have noticed. there were over a thousand of us,
perhaps two, and every one with an idea of where to find the horn of valere. i
have mineit still may be the right onebut no hunter can afford to pass up
a strange trail. the horn will certainly lie at the end of a strange trail, and i
have never seen one any stranger than the trail you four make. where are you
bound? illian? somewhere else?
what was your idea? he asked. about where the horn is? safe in tar
valon, i hope, and the light send i never see it again. you think its in
ghealdan?
she frowned at himhe had the feeling she did not give up a scent once
she had raised it, but he was ready to offer her as many side trails as she
would takethen said, have you ever heard of manetheren?
he nearly choked. i have heard of it, he said cautiously.
every queen of manetheren was an aes sedai, and the king the warder
bound to her. i cant imagine a place like that, but that is what the books say.
it was a large landmost of andor and ghealdan and more besidesbut the
capital, the city itself, was in the mountains of mist. that is where i think the
horn is. unless you four lead me to it.
his hackles stirred. she was lecturing him as if he were an untaught village


 lout. youll not find the horn or manetheren. the city was destroyed during
the trolloc wars, when the last queen drew too much of the one power to
destroy the dreadlords who had killed her husband. moiraine had told him
the names of that king and queen, but he did not remember them.
not in manetheren, farmboy, she said calmly, though a land such as that
would make a good hiding place. but there were other nations, other cities, in
the mountains of mist, so old that not even aes sedai remember them. and
think of all those stories about it being bad luck to enter the mountains. what
better place for the horn to be hidden than in one of those forgotten cities.
i have heard stories of something being hidden in the mountains. would
she believe him? he had never been good at lying. the stories did not say
what, but its supposed to be the greatest treasure in the world, so maybe it is
the horn. but the mountains of mist stretch for hundreds of leagues. if you
are going to find it, you should not waste time following us. youll need it all
to find the horn before orban and gann.
i told you, those two have some strange idea the horn is hidden in the
great blackwood. she smiled up at him. her mouth was not too big at all,
when she smiled. and i told you a hunter has to follow strange trails. you
are lucky orban and gann were injured fighting all those aielmen, or they
might well be aboard, too. at least i will not get in your way, or try to take
over, or pick a fight with the warder.
he growled disgustedly. we are just travelers on our way to illian, girl.
what is your name? if i have to share this ship with you for days yet, i cant
keep calling you girl.
i call myself mandarb. he could not stop the guffaw that burst out of
him. those tilted eyes regarded him with heat. i will teach you something,
farmboy. her voice remained level. barely. in the old tongue, mandarb
means blade. it is a name worthy of a hunter of the horn!
he managed to get his laughter under control, and hardly wheezed at all as
he pointed to the rope pen between the masts. you see that black stallion?
his name is mandarb.
the heat went out of her eyes, and spots of color bloomed on her cheeks.
oh. i was born zarine bashere, but zarine is no name for a hunter. in the
stories, hunters have names like rogosh eagleeye.
she looked so crestfallen that he hastened to say, i like the name zarine. it
suits you. the heat flashed back into her eyes, and for a moment he thought
she was about to produce one of her knives again. it is late, zarine. i want


 some sleep.
he turned his back to start for the hatch that led belowdeck, prickles
running across his shoulders. crewmen still padded up the deck and back,
working the sweeps. fool. a girl would not stick a knife in me. not with all
these people watching. would she? just as he reached the hatch, she called to
him.
farmboy! perhaps i will call myself faile. my father used to call me that,
when i was little. it means falcon. 
he stiffened and almost missed the first step of the ladder. coincidence. he
made himself go down without looking back toward her. it has to be. the
passageway was dark, but enough moonlight filtered down behind him for
him to make his way. someone was snoring loudly in one of the cabins. min,
why did you have to go seeing things?


 c h a p t e r
3 6


daughter of the night


realizing that he had no way of knowing which cabin was supposed to be
his, he put his head into several. they were dark, and all of them had two men
asleep in the narrow beds built against each side, all but one, which held
loial, sitting on the floor between the bedsand barely fittingscribbling in
his clothbound book of notes by the light of a gimballed lantern. the ogier
wanted to talk about the events of the day, but perrin, jaws creaking with the
effort of holding his yawns in, thought the ship must have run far enough
downriver by now to make it safe to sleep. safe to dream. even if they tried,
wolves could not long keep pace with the sweeps and the current.
finally he found a windowless cabin with no one in it at all, which suited
him just as well. he wanted to be alone. a coincidence in the name, thats all,
he thought as he lit the lantern mounted on the wall. anyway, her real name is
zarine. but the girl with the high cheekbones and dark, tilted eyes was not
uppermost in his thoughts. he put his bow and other belongings on one
cramped bed, tossed his cloak over them, and sat on the other to tug off his
boots.
elyas machera had found a way to live with what he was, a man somehow
linked with wolves, and he had not gone mad. thinking back, perrin was sure
elyas had been living that way for years before he ever met the man. he
wants to be that way. he accepts it, anyway. that was no solution. perrin did
not want to live that way, did not want to accept. but if you have the bar stock
to make a knife, you accept it and make a knife, even if youd like a woodaxe.
no! my life is more than iron to be hammered into shape.
cautiously, he reached out with his mind, feeling for wolves, and found
nothing. oh, there was a dim impression of wolves somewhere in the


 distance, but it faded even as he touched it. for the first time in so long, he
was alone. blessedly alone.
blowing out the lantern, he lay down, for the first time in days. how in the
light will loial manage in one of these? those all but sleepless nights rolled
over him, exhaustion slacking his muscles. it came to him that he had
managed to put the aiel out of his head. and the whitecloaks. lightforsaken
axe! burn me, i wish i had never seen it, was his last thought before sleep.
thick gray fog surrounded him, dense enough low down that he could not see
his own boots, and so heavy on every side that he could not make out
anything ten paces away. there was surely nothing nearer. anything at all
might lie within it. the mist did not feel right; there was no dampness to it.
he put a hand to his belt, seeking the comfort of knowing he could defend
himself, and gave a start. his axe was not there.
something moved in the fog, a swirling in the grayness. something coming
his way.
he tensed, wondering if it was better to run or stand and fight with his bare
hands, wondering if there was anything to fight.
the billowing furrow boring through the fog resolved itself into a wolf, its
shaggy form almost one with the heavy mist.
hopper?
the wolf hesitated, then came to stand beside him. it was hopperhe was
certainbut something about the wolfs stance, something in the yellow eyes
that looked up briefly to meet his, demanded silence, in mind as well as body.
those eyes demanded that he follow, too.
he laid a hand on the wolfs back, and as he did, hopper started forward.
he let himself be led. the fur under his hand was thick and shaggy. it felt
real.
the fog began to thicken, until only his hand told him hopper was still
there, until a glance down did not even show him his own chest. just gray
mist. he might as well have been wrapped in newsheared wool for all he
could see. it struck him that he had heard nothing, either. not even the sound
of his own footsteps. he wiggled his toes, and was relieved to feel the boots
on his feet.
the gray became darker, and he and the wolf walked through pitch


 blackness. he could not see his hand when he touched his nose. he could not
see his nose, for that matter. he tried closing his eyes for a moment, and could
not tell any difference. there was still no sound. his hand felt the rough hair
of hoppers back, but he was not sure he could feel anything under his boots.
suddenly hopper stopped, forcing him to halt, too. he looked around . . .
and snapped his eyes shut. he could tell a difference, now. and feel
something, too, a queasy twisting of his stomach. he made himself open his
eyes and look down.
what he saw could not have been there, not unless he and hopper were
standing in midair. he could see nothing of the wolf or himself, as if neither
had bodies at allthat thought nearly tied his stomach into knotsbut below
him, as clear as if lit by a thousand lamps, stretched a vast array of mirrors,
seemingly hanging in blackness though as level as if they stood on a vast
floor. they stretched as far as he could see in every direction, but right
beneath his feet, there was a clear space. and people in it. suddenly he could
hear their voices as well as if he had been standing among them.
great lord, one of the men muttered, where is this place? he looked
around once, flinching at his image cast back at him many thousandfold, and
held his eyes forward after that. the others huddled around him seemed even
more afraid. i was asleep in tar valon, great lord. i am asleep in tar valon!
where is this place? have i gone mad?
some of the men around him wore ornate coats full of embroidery, others
plainer garb, while some seemed to be naked, or in their smallclothes.
i, too, sleep, a naked man nearly screamed. in tear. i remember lying
down with my wife!
and i do sleep in illian, a man in red and gold said, sounding shaken. i
know that i do sleep, but that cannot be. i know that i do dream, but that does
be impossible. where does this be, great lord? are you really come to me?
the darkhaired man who faced them was garbed in black, with silver lace
at his throat and wrists. now and again he put a hand to his chest, as if it hurt
him. there was light everywhere down there, coming from nowhere, but this
man below perrin seemed cloaked in shadow. darkness rolled around him,
caressed him.
silence! the blackclothed man did not speak loudly, but he had no need
to. for the space of that word, he had raised his head; his eyes and mouth
were holes boring into a raging forgefire, all flame and fiery glow.


 perrin knew him, then. baalzamon. he was staring down at baalzamon
himself. fear struck through him like hammered spikes. he would have run,
but he could not feel his feet.
hopper shifted. he felt the thick fur under his hand and gripped it hard.
something real. something more real, he hoped, than what he saw. but he
knew that both were real.
the men huddling together cowered.
you have been given tasks, baalzamon said. some of these tasks you
have carried out. at others, you have failed. now and again his eyes and
mouth vanished in flame again, and the mirrors flashed with reflected fire.
those who have been marked for death must die. those who have been
marked for taking must bow to me. to fail the great lord of the dark cannot
be forgiven. fire shone through his eyes, and the darkness around him roiled
and spun. you. his finger pointed out the man who had spoken of tar
valon, a fellow dressed like a merchant, in plainly cut clothes of the finest
cloth. the others shied away from him as if he had blackbile fever, leaving
him to cower alone. you allowed the boy to escape tar valon.
the man screamed, and began to quiver like a file struck against an anvil.
he seemed to become less solid, and his scream thinned with him.
you all dream, baalzamon said, but what happens in this dream is
real. the shrieking man was only a bundle of mist shaped like a man, his
scream far distant, and then even the mist was gone. i fear he will never
wake. he laughed, and his mouth roared flame. the rest of you will not fail
me again. begone! wake, and obey! the other men vanished.
for a moment baalzamon stood alone, then suddenly there was a woman
with him, clad all in white and silver.
shock hit perrin. he could never forget a woman so beautiful. she was the
woman from his dream, the one who had urged him to glory.
an ornate silver throne appeared behind her, and she sat, carefully
arranging her silken skirts. you make free use of my domain, she said.
your domain? baalzamon said. you claim it yours, then? do you no
longer serve the great lord of the dark? the darkness around him thickened
for an instant, seemed to boil.
i serve, she said quickly. i have served the lord of the twilight long.
long did i lie imprisoned for my service, in an endless, dreamless sleep. only
gray men and myrddraal are denied dreams. even trollocs can dream.


 dreams were always mine, to use and walk. now i am free again, and i will
use what is mine.
what is yours, baalzamon said. the blackness swirling round him
seemed mirthful. you always thought yourself greater than you were,
lanfear.
the name cut at perrin like a newly honed knife. one of the forsaken had
been in his dreams. moiraine had been right. some of them were free.
the woman in white was on her feet, the throne gone. i am as great as i
am. what have your plans come to? three thousand years and more of
whispering in ears and pulling the strings of throned puppets like an aes
sedai! her voice invested the name with all scorn. three thousand years,
and yet lews therin walks the world again, and these aes sedai all but have
him leashed. can you control him? can you turn him? he was mine before
ever that strawhaired chit ilyena saw him! he will be mine again!
do you serve yourself now, lanfear? baalzamons voice was soft, but
flame raged continuously in his eyes and mouth. have you abandoned your
oaths to the great lord of the dark? for an instant the darkness nearly
obliterated him, only the glowing fires showing through. they are not so
easily broken as the oaths to the light you forsook, proclaiming your new
master in the very hall of the servants. your master claims you forever,
lanfear. will you serve, or do you choose an eternity of pain, of endless
dying without release?
i serve. despite her words, she stood tall and defiant. i serve the great
lord of the dark and none other. forever!
the vast array of mirror began to vanish as if black waves rolled in over it,
ever closer to the center. the tide rolled over baalzamon and lanfear. there
was only blackness.
perrin felt hopper move, and he was more than glad to follow, guided only
by the feel of fur under his hand. it was not until he was moving that he
realized he could. he tried to puzzle out what he had seen, without any
success. baalzamon and lanfear. his tongue stuck to the roof of his mouth.
for some reason, lanfear frightened him more than baalzamon did. perhaps
because she had been in his dreams in the mountains. light! one of the
forsaken in my dreams! light! and unless he had missed something, she had
defied the dark one. he had been told and taught that the shadow could have
no power over you if you denied it; but how could a darkfriendnot just a
darkfriend; one of the forsaken!defy the shadow? i must be mad, like


 simions brother. these dreams have driven me mad!
slowly the blackness became fog again, and the fog gradually thinned until
he walked out of it with hopper onto a grassy hillside bright with daylight.
birds began to sing from a thicket at the foot of the hill. he looked back. a
hilly plain dotted with clumps of trees stretched to the horizon. there was no
sign of fog anywhere. the big, grizzled wolf stood watching him.
what was that? he demanded, struggling in his mind to turn the question
to thoughts the wolf could understand. why did you show it to me? what
was it?
emotions and images flooded his thoughts, and his mind put words to
them. what you must see. be careful, young bull. this place is dangerous. be
wary as a cub hunting porcupine. that came as something closer to small
thorny back, but his mind named the animal the way he knew it as a man.
you are too young, too new.
was it real?
all is real, what is seen, and what is not seen. that seemed to be all the
answer hopper was going to give.
hopper, how are you here? i saw you die. i felt you die!
all are here. all brothers and sisters that are, all that were, all that will be.
perrin knew that wolves did not smile, not the way humans did, but for an
instant he had the impression that hopper was grinning. here, i soar like the
eagle. the wolf gathered himself and leaped, up into the air. up and up it
carried him, until he dwindled to a speck in the sky, and a last thought came.
to soar.
perrin stared after him with his mouth hanging open. he did it. his eyes
burned suddenly, and he cleared his throat and scrubbed at his nose. i will be
crying like a girl, next. without thinking, he looked around to see if anyone
had seen him, and that quickly everything changed.
he was standing on a rise, with shadowy, indistinct dips and swells all
around him. they seemed to fade into the distance too soon. rand stood
below him. rand, and a ragged circle of myrddraal and men and women his
eyes seemed to slide right past. dogs howled somewhere in the distance, and
perrin knew they were hunting something. myrddraal scent and the stink of
burned sulphur filled the air. perrins hackles rose.
the circle of myrddraal and people came closer to rand, all walking as if
asleep. and rand began to kill them. balls of fire flew from his hands and


 consumed two. lightning flashed from above to shrivel others. bars of light
like whitehot steel flew from his fists to more. and the survivors continued
to walk slowly closer, as if none of them saw what was happening. one by
one they died, until none were left, and rand sank down on his knees,
panting. perrin was not sure whether he was laughing or crying; it seemed to
be some of each.
shapes appeared over the rises, more people coming, more myrddraal, all
intent on rand.
perrin cupped his hands to his mouth. rand! rand, there are more
coming!
rand looked up at him from his crouch, snarling, sweat slicking his face.
rand, theyre!
burn you! rand howled.
light burned perrins eyes, and pain seared everything.
groaning, he rolled into a ball on the narrow bed, the light still burning
behind his eyelids. his chest hurt. he raised a hand to it and winced when he
felt a burn under his shirt, a spot no bigger than a silver penny.
bit by bit he forced his knotted muscles to let him straighten his legs and
lie flat in the dark cabin. moiraine. i have to tell moiraine this time. just have
to wait till the pain goes away.
but as the pain began to fade, exhaustion took him. he barely had a
thought that he must get up before sleep pulled him down again.
when he opened his eyes again, he lay staring at the beams overhead. light
at the top and bottom of the door told him morning had come. he put a hand
to his chest to convince himself he had imagined it, imagined it so well that
he had actually felt a burn. . . .
his fingers found the burn. i didnt imagine it, then. he had dim memories
of a few other dreams, fading even as he recalled them. ordinary dreams. he
even felt as if he had had a good nights sleep. and could use another one
right now. but it meant he could sleep. as long as there are no wolves around,
anyway.
he remembered making a decision in that brief waking after the dream
with hopper, and after a moment he decided it had been a good one.


 it took knocking on five doors and being cursed at twicethe inhabitants
of two cabins had gone on deckbefore he found moiraine. she was fully
dressed, but sitting on one of the narrow beds crosslegged, reading in her
book of notes by lantern light. back near the beginning, he saw, notes that
must have been made even before she had come to emonds field. lans
things were neatly placed on the other bed.
i had a dream, he told her, and proceeded to tell her of it. all of it. he
even pulled up his shirt to show her the small circle on his chest, red, with
wavy red lines radiating from it. he had kept things from her before, and he
suspected he would again, but this might be too important to hold back. the
pin was the smallest part of a pair of scissors, and the easiest made, but
without it, the scissors cut no cloth. when he was done, he stood there
waiting.
she had watched him without expression, except that those dark eyes had
examined every word as it came out of his mouth, weighed it, measured it,
held it up to the light. now she sat the same way, only it was he who was
examined, weighed, and held up to the light.
well, is it important? he demanded finally. i think it was one of those
wolf dreams you told me aboutim sure it was; it must have been!but that
doesnt make what i saw real. only, you said maybe some of the forsaken are
free, and he called her lanfear, and. . . . is it important, or am i standing here
making a fool out of myself?
there are women, she said slowly, who would do their best to gentle
you if they heard what i just did. his lungs seemed to freeze; he could not
breathe. i am not accusing you of being able to channel, she went on, and
the ice inside him melted, or even of being able to learn. an attempt at
gentling would not harm you, beyond the rough treatment the red ajah
would give you before they realized their error. such men are so rare, even
the reds with all their hunting have not found more than three in the last ten
years. before the outbreak of false dragons, at least. what i am trying to
make clear to you is that i do not think you will suddenly begin wielding the
power. you do not have to be afraid of that.
well, thank you very much for that, he said bitterly. you did not have to
scare me to death just so you could tell me there was no need to be
frightened!
oh, you do have reason to be frightened. or at least careful, as the wolf
suggested. red sisters, or others, might kill you before they discovered there


 was nothing to gentle in you.
light! light burn me! he stared at her with a frown. youre trying to
lead me around by the nose, moiraine, but i am no calf, and theres no ring in
my nose. the red ajah or any other would not think of gentling unless there
was something real in what i dreamed. does it mean the forsaken are loose?
i told you before that they might be. some of them. your . . . dreams are
nothing i expected, perrin. dreamers have written of wolves, but i did not
expect this.
well, i think it was real. i think i saw something that really happened,
something i wasnt supposed to see. what you must see. i think lanfear is
loose at the very least. what are you going to do?
i am going to illian. and then i will go to tear, and hope to reach it before
rand. we had need to leave remen too quickly for lan to learn whether he
crossed the river or went down it. we should know before we reach illian,
though. we will find sign if he has gone this way. she glanced at her book as
if she wanted to resume her reading.
is that all you are going to do? with lanfear loose, and the light alone
knows how many of the others?
do not question me, she said coldly. you do not know which questions
to ask, and you would comprehend less than half the answers if i gave them.
which i will not.
he shifted his feet under her gaze until it became clear she would say no
more on the matter. his shirt rubbed painfully at the burn on his chest. it did
not seem a bad hurtnot for being struck by lightning it doesnt!but how
he had come by it was another matter. uh. . . . will you heal this?
are you no longer uneasy about the one power being used on you, then,
perrin? no, i will not heal it. it is not serious, and it will remind you of the
need to be careful. careful about pressing her, he knew, as well as about
dreams or letting others know of them. if there is nothing else, perrin?
he started for the door, then stopped. there is one thing. if you knew a
womans name was zarine, would you think it meant anything about her?
why under the light do you ask this question?
a girl, he said awkwardly. a young woman. i met her last night. shes
one of the other passengers. he would let her discover for herself that zarine
knew she was aes sedai. and seemed to think following them would lead her


 to the horn of valere. he would not keep back anything he thought was
important, but if moiraine could be secretive, so could he.
zarine. it is a saldaean name. no woman would name her daughter that
unless she expected her to be a great beauty. and a heartbreaker. one to lie on
cushions in palaces, surrounded by servants and suitors. she smiled, briefly
but with great amusement. perhaps you have another reason to be careful,
perrin, if there is a zarine as a passenger with us.
i intend to be careful, he told her. at least he knew why zarine did not
like her name. hardly fitting for a hunter of the horn. as long as she doesnt
call herself falcon.
when he went on deck, lan was there, looking over mandarb. and zarine
was sitting on a coil of rope near the railing, sharpening one of her knives and
watching him. the big, triangular sails were set and taut, and the snow goose
flew downriver.
zarines eyes followed perrin as he walked by her to stand in the bow. the
water curled to either side of the prow like earth turning around a good plow.
he wondered about dreams and aielmen, mins viewings and falcons. his
chest hurt. life had never been as tangled as this.
rand sat up out of his exhausted sleep, gasping, the cloak he had used as a
blanket falling away. his side ached, the old wound from falme throbbing.
his fire had burned down to coals with only a few wavering flames, but it was
still enough to make the shadows move. that was perrin. it was! it was him,
not a dream. somehow. i almost killed him! light, i have to be careful!
shivering, he picked up a length of oak branch and started to shove it into
the coals. the trees were scattered in these murandian hills, still close to the
manetherendrelle, but he had found just enough fallen branches for his fire,
the wood just old enough to be properly cured but not rotten. before the wood
touched the coals, he stopped. there were horses coming, ten or a dozen of
them, walking slowly. i have to be careful. i cannot make another mistake.
the horses swung toward his failing fire, entered the dim light, and
stopped. the shadows obscured their riders, but most seemed to be roughfaced men wearing round helmets and long leather jerkins sewn all over with
metal discs like fish scales. one was a woman with graying hair and a nononsense look on her face. her dark dress was plain wool, but the finest
weave, and adorned with a silver pin in the shape of a lion. a merchant, she
seemed to him; he had seen her sort among those who came to buy tabac and


 wool in the two rivers. a merchant and her guards.
i have to be careful, he thought as he stood. no mistakes.
you have chosen a good campsite, young man, she said. i have often
used it on my way to remen. there is a small spring nearby. i trust you have
no objection to my sharing it? her guards were already dismounting,
hitching at their sword belts and loosening saddle girths.
none, rand told her. careful. two steps brought him close enough, and
he leaped into the air, spinningthistledown floats on the whirlwind
heronmark blade carved from fire coming into his hands to take her head off
before surprise could even form on her face. she was the most dangerous.
he alighted as the womans head rolled from the crupper of her horse. the
guards yelled and clawed for their swords, screamed as they realized his blade
burned. he danced among them in the forms lan had taught him, and knew
he could have killed all ten with ordinary steel, but the blade he wielded was
part of him. the last man fell, and it had been so like practicing the forms that
he had already begun the sheathing called folding the fan before he
remembered he wore no scabbard and this blade would have turned it to ash
at a touch if he had.
letting the sword vanish, he turned to examine the horses. most had run
away, but some not far, and the womans tall gelding stood with rolling eyes,
whickering uneasily. her headless corpse, lying on the ground, had
maintained its grip on the reins, and held the animals head down.
rand pulled them free, pausing only to gather his few belongings before
swinging into the saddle. i have to be careful, he thought as he looked over
the dead. no mistakes.
the power still filled him, the flow from saidin sweeter than honey, ranker
than rotted meat. abruptly he channelednot really understanding what it
was he did, or how, only that it seemed right; and it worked, lifting the
corpses. he set them in a line, facing him, kneeling, faces in the dirt. for
those who had faces left. kneeling to him.
if i am the dragon reborn, he told them, that is the way it is supposed
to be, isnt it? letting go of saidin was hard, but he did it. if i hold it too
much, how will i keep the madness away? he laughed bitterly. or is it too late
for that?
frowning, he peered at the line. he had been sure there were only ten men,
but eleven men knelt in that line, one of them without armor of any sort but


 with a dagger still gripped in his hand.
you chose the wrong company, rand told that man.
wheeling the gelding, he dug in his heels and set the animal to a dead
gallop into the night. it was a long way to tear, yet, but he meant to get there
by the straightest way, if he had to kill horses or steal them. i will put an end
to it. the taunting. the baiting. i will end it! callandor. it called to him.


 c h a p t e r
3 7


fires in cairhien


egwene returned a graceful nod to the respectful bow of the ships crewman
who padded past her, barefoot, on his way to pull a rope that already seemed
taut, possibly shifting a trifle the way one of the big square sails set. as he
trotted back toward where the roundfaced captain stood by the tillerman, he
bowed again, and she nodded once more before returning her attentions to the
forested cairhien shore, separated from the blue crane by less than twenty
spans of water.
a village was sliding past, or what had been a village once. half the houses
were only smoldering piles of rubble with chimneys sticking starkly out of the
ruins. on the other houses, doors swung with the wind, and pieces of
furniture, bits of clothing and house ware littered the dirt street, tumbled
about as if thrown. nothing living moved in the village except for one halfstarved dog that ignored the passing ship as it trotted out of sight behind the
toppled walls of what appeared to have been an inn. she could never see such
a sight without a queasiness settling in her belly, but she tried to maintain the
dispassionate serenity she thought an aes sedai might have. it did not help
much. beyond the village, a thick plume of smoke was rising into the sky.
three or four miles off, she estimated.
this was not the first such plume of smoke she had seen since the erinin
began to flow along the border of cairhien, nor the first such village. at least
this time there were no bodies in sight. captain ellisor sometimes had to sail
close to the cairhienin shore because of mudflatshe said they shifted in this
part of the riverbut however close he came, she had not seen a single living
person.
the village and the smoke plume slipped away behind the ship, but already


 another column of smoke was coming into view ahead, further from the river.
the forest was thinning, ash and leatherleaf and black elder giving way to
willow and whitewood and wateroak, and some she did not recognize.
the wind caught her cloak, but she let it stream, feeling the cold cleanness
of the air, feeling the freedom of wearing brown instead of any sort of white,
though it had not been her first choice. yet dress and cloak were of the best
wool, well cut and well sewn.
another sailor trotted by, bowing as he went. she vowed to learn at least
some of what it was they were doing; she did not like feeling ignorant.
wearing her great serpent ring on her right hand made for a good deal of
bowing with a captain and crew born mainly in tar valon.
she had won that argument with nynaeve, though nynaeve had been sure
she herself was the only one of the three of them old enough for people to
believe she was aes sedai. but nynaeve had been wrong. egwene was ready
to admit that both she and elayne had received startled looks on boarding the
blue crane that afternoon at southharbor, and captain ellisors eyebrows had
climbed almost to where his hair would have begun had he had any, but he
had been all smiles and bows.
an honor, aes sedai. three aes sedai to travel on my vessel? an honor
indeed. i promise you a quick journey as far as you wish. and no trouble with
cairhienin brigands. i no longer put in on that side of the river. unless you
wish it, of course, aes sedai. andoran soldiers do hold a few towns on the
cairhienin side. an honor, aes sedai.
his eyebrows had shot up again when they asked for just one cabin among
themnot even nynaeve wanted to be alone at night if she did not have to
be. each could have a cabin to herself at no extra charge, he told them; he had
no other passengers, his cargo was aboard, and if aes sedai had urgent
business downriver, he would not wait even an hour for anyone else who
might want passage. they said again that one cabin would be sufficient.
he was startled, and it had been plain from his face that he did not
understand, but chin ellisor, born and bred in tar valon, was not one to
question aes sedai once they made their intentions clear. if two of them
seemed very young, well, some aes sedai were young.
the abandoned ruins vanished behind egwene. the column of smoke drew
closer, and there was a hint of another much further still from the riverbank.
the forest was turning to low, grassy hills dotted with thickets. trees that
made flowers in the spring had them, tiny white blossoms on snowberry and


 bright red sugarberry. one tree she did not know was covered in round white
flowers bigger than her two hands together. occasionally a climbing wildrose
put swaths of yellow or white through branches thick with the green of leaves
and the red of new growth. it was all too sharp a contrast to the ashes and
rubble to be entirely pleasant.
egwene wished she had an aes sedai to question herself right then. one
she could trust. brushing her pouch with her fingers, she could barely feel the
twisted stone ring of the terangreal inside.
she had tried it every night but two since leaving tar valon, and it had not
worked the same way twice. oh, she always found herself in telaranrhiod,
but the only thing she saw that might have been any use was the heart of the
stone again, each time without silvie to tell her things. there was certainly
nothing about the black ajah.
her own dreams, without the terangreal, had been filled with images that
seemed almost like glimpses of the unseen world. rand holding a sword that
blazed like the sun, till she could hardly see that it was a sword, could hardly
make out that it was him at all. rand threatened in a dozen ways, none of
them the least bit real. in one dream he had been on a huge stones board, the
black and white stones as big as boulders, and him dodging the monstrous
hands that moved them and seemed to try to crush him under them. it could
have meant something. it very probably did, but beyond the fact that rand
was in danger from someone, or two someonesshe thought that much was
clearbeyond that, she simply did not know. i cannot help him, now. i have
my own duty. i dont even know where he is, except that it is probably five
hundred leagues from here.
she had dreamed of perrin with a wolf, and with a falcon, and a hawk
and the falcon and the hawk fightingof perrin running from someone
deadly, and perrin stepping willingly over the edge of a towering cliff while
saying, it must be done. i must learn to fly before i reach the bottom. there
had been one dream of an aiel, and she thought that had to do with perrin,
too, but she was not sure. and a dream of min, springing a steel trap but
somehow walking through it without so much as seeing it. there had been
dreams of mat, too. of mat with dice spinning round himshe felt she knew
where that one came fromof mat being followed by a man who was not
thereshe still did not understand that; there was a man following, or maybe
more than one, but in some way there was no one thereof mat riding
desperately toward something unseen in the distance that he had to reach, and
mat with a woman who seemed to be tossing fireworks about. an illuminator,


 she assumed, but that made no more sense than anything else.
she had had so many dreams that she was beginning to doubt them all.
maybe it had to do with using the terangreal so often, or maybe with just
carrying it. maybe she was finally learning what a dreamer did. frantic
dreams, hectic dreams. men and women breaking out of a cage, then putting
on crowns. a woman playing with puppets, and another dream where the
strings on puppets led to the hands of larger puppets, and their strings led to
still greater puppets, on and on until the last strings vanished into
unimaginable heights. kings dying, queens weeping, battles raging.
whitecloaks ravaging the two rivers. she had even dreamed of the seanchan
again. more than once. those she shut away in a dark corner; she would not
let herself think of them. her mother and father, every night.
she was certain what that meant, at least, or thought she was. it means im
off hunting the black ajah, and i do not know what my dreams mean or how
to make the fool terangreal do what it should, and im frightened, and. . . .
and homesick. for an instant she thought how good it would be to have her
mother send her up to bed knowing everything would be better in the
morning. only mother cant solve my problems for me anymore, and father
cant promise to chase away monsters and make me believe it. i have to do it
myself now.
how far in the past all that was, now. she did not want it back, not really,
but it had been a warm time, and it seemed so long ago. it would be
wonderful just to see them again, to hear their voices. when i wear this ring
on the finger i choose by right.
she had finally let nynaeve and elayne each try sleeping one night with the
stone ringsurprised at how reluctant she had been to let it out of her own
handsand they had awakened to speak of what was surely telaranrhiod,
but neither had seen more than a glimpse of the heart of the stone, nothing
that was of any use.
the thick column of smoke now lay abreast of the blue crane. perhaps
five or six miles from the river, she thought. the other was only a smudge on
the horizon. it could almost have been a cloud, but she was sure it was not.
small thickets grew tight along the riverbank in some places, and between
them the grass came right down to the water except where an undercut bank
had fallen in.
elayne came on deck and joined her at the rail, the wind whipping her dark
cloak as well. she wore sturdy wool, too. that had been one argument


 nynaeve won. their clothes. egwene had maintained that aes sedai always
wore the best, even when they traveledshe had been thinking of the silks
she wore in telaranrhiodbut nynaeve pointed out that even with as much
gold as the amyrlin had left in the back of her wardrobe, and it was a fat
purse, they still had no idea how much things would cost downriver. the
servants said mat had been right about the civil war in cairhien, and what it
had done to prices. to egwenes surprise, elayne had pointed out that brown
sisters wore wool more often than silk. elayne had been so eager to be away
from the kitchen, egwene thought, she would have worn rags.
i wonder how mat is doing? no doubt trying to dice with the captain for
whatever ship hes traveling on.
terrible, elayne murmured. it is so terrible.
what is? egwene said absently. i hope he isnt showing that paper we
gave him around too freely.
elayne gave her a startled look, and then a frown. that! she gestured
toward the distant smoke. how can you ignore it?
i can ignore it because i do not want to think of what the people are going
through, because i cannot do anything about it, and because we have to reach
tear. because what were hunting is in tear. she was surprised at her own
vehemence. i cant do anything about it. and the black ajah is in tear.
the more she thought of it, the more certain she became that they would
have to find a way into the heart of the stone. perhaps no one but the high
lords of tear were allowed into it, but she was becoming convinced that the
key to springing the black ajahs trap and thwarting them lay in the heart of
the stone.
i know all of that, egwene, but it does not stop me feeling for the
cairhienin.
i have heard lectures about the wars andor fought with cairhien,
egwene said dryly. bennae sedai says you and cairhien have fought more
often than any two nations except tear and illian.
the other woman gave her a sidelong look. elayne had never gotten used
to egwenes refusal to admit she was andoran herself. at least, lines on maps
said the two rivers was part of andor, and elayne believed the maps.
we have fought wars against them, egwene, but since the damage they
suffered in the aiel war, andor has sold them nearly as much grain as tear
has. the trade has stopped, now. with every cairhienin house fighting every


 other for the sun throne, who would buy the grain, or see it distributed to the
people? if the fighting is as bad as what weve seen on the banks. . . . well.
you cannot feed a people for twenty years and feel nothing for them when
they must be starving.
a gray man, egwene said, and elayne jumped, trying to look in every
direction at once. the glow of saidar surrounded her.
where?
egwene took a slower look around the decks, but to make sure no one was
close enough to overhear. captain ellisor still stood in the stern, by the
shirtless man holding the long tiller. another sailor was up in the very bow,
scanning the waters ahead for signs of submerged mudbanks, and two more
padded about the deck, now and again adjusting a rope to the sails. the rest of
the crew were all below. one of the pair stopped to check the lashings on the
rowboat tied upside down on the deck; she waited for him to go on before
speaking.
fool! she muttered softly. me, elayne, not you, so dont glower at me
like that. she continued in a whisper. a gray man is after mat, elayne.
that must be what that dream meant, but i never saw it. i am a fool!
the glow around elayne vanished. do not be so hard on yourself, she
whispered back. perhaps it does mean that, but i did not see it, and neither
did nynaeve. she paused; redgold curls swung as she shook her head. but
it doesnt make sense, egwene. why would a gray man be after mat? there
is nothing in my letter to my mother that could harm us in the slightest.
i do not know why. egwene frowned. there has to be a reason. i am
sure that is what that dream means.
even if you are right, egwene, there is nothing you can do about it.
i know that, egwene said bitterly. she did not even know whether he was
ahead of them or behind. ahead, she suspected; mat would have left without
any delay. either way, she muttered to herself, it does no good. i finally
know what one of my dreams means, and it doesnt help a hemstitch worth!
but if you know one meaning, elayne told her, perhaps now you will
know others. if we sit down and talk them over, perhaps
the blue crane gave a shuddering lurch, throwing elayne to the deck and
egwene on top of her. when egwene struggled to her feet, the shoreline no
longer slid by. the vessel had halted, with the bow raised and the deck canted
to one side. the sails flapped noisily in the wind.


 chin ellisor pushed himself to his feet and ran for the bow, leaving the
tillerman to rise on his own. you blind worm of a farmer! he roared toward
the man in the bow, who was clinging to the rail to keep from falling the rest
of the way over. you dirtgrubbing get of a goat! havent you been on the
river long enough yet to recognize how the water ruffles over a mudflat? he
seized the man on the rail by the shoulders and pulled him back onto the deck,
but only to shove him out of the way so he could peer down over the bow
himself. if youve put a hole in my hull, i will use your guts for caulking!
the other crewmen were clambering to their feet, now, and more came
scrambling up from below. they all ran to cluster around the captain.
nynaeve appeared at the head of the ladder that led down to the passenger
cabins, still straightening her skirts. with a sharp tug at her braid, she frowned
at the knot of men in the bow, then strode to egwene and elayne. he ran us
onto something, did he? after all his talk of knowing the river as well as he
knows his wife. the woman probably never receives as much as a smile from
him. she jerked the thick braid again and went forward, pushing her way
through the sailors to reach the captain. they were all intent on the water
below.
there was no point in joining her. he will have us off faster if hes left to it.
nynaeve was probably telling him how to do the work. elayne seemed to feel
the same way, from the rueful shake of the head she gave as she watched the
captain and crewmen all turn their attention respectfully from whatever was
under the bow to nynaeve.
a ripple of agitation ran through the men, and grew stronger. for a moment
the captains hands could be seen, waving in protest over the other mens
heads, and then nynaeve was striding away from themthey made way,
bowing nowwith ellisor hurrying beside her and mopping his round face
with a large red handkerchief. his anxious voice became audible as they drew
near.
. . . a good fifteen miles to the next village on the andor side, aes sedai,
and at least five or six miles downriver on the cairhien side! andoran soldiers
hold it, it is true, but they do not hold the miles from here to there! he wiped
at his face as if he were dripping sweat.
a sunken ship, nynaeve told the the other two women. the work of
river brigands, the captain thinks. he means to try backing off it with the
sweeps, but he does not seem to think that will work.
we were running fast when we hit, aes sedai. i wanted to make good


 speed for you. ellisor rubbed even harder at his face. he was afraid the aes
sedai would blame him, egwene realized. we are stuck hard. but i do not
think we are taking water, aes sedai. there is no need to worry. another ship
will be along. two sets of sweeps will surely get us free. there is no need for
you to be put ashore, aes sedai. i do swear it, by the light.
you were thinking of leaving the ship? egwene asked. do you think
that is wise?
of course, its! nynaeve stopped and frowned at her. egwene returned
the frown with a level stare. nynaeve went on in a calmer tone, if still a tight
one. the captain says it may be an hour before another ship comes along.
one with enough sweeps to make a difference. or a day. or two, maybe. i do
not think we can afford to waste a day or two waiting. we can be in this
villagewhat did you call it, captain? jurene?we can walk to jurene in
two hours or less. if captain ellisor frees his vessel as quickly as he hopes,
we can reboard then. he says he will stop to see if we are there. if he does not
get free, though, we can take ship from jurene. we may even find a vessel
waiting. the captain says traders do stop there, because of the andoran
soldiers. she drew a deep breath, but her voice grew tighter. have i
explained my reasoning fully enough? do you need more?
it is clear to me, elayne put in quickly before egwene could speak. and
it sounds a good idea. you think it is a good idea, too, dont you, egwene?
egwene gave a grudging nod. i suppose it is.
but, aes sedai, ellisor protested, at least go to the andor bank. the
war, aes sedai. brigands, and every sort of ruffian, and the soldiers not much
better. the very wreck under our bow shows the sort of men they are.
we have not seen a living soul on the cairhien side, nynaeve said, and
in any case, we are far from defenseless, captain. and i will not walk fifteen
miles when i can walk six.
of course, aes sedai. ellisor really was sweating, now. i did not mean
to suggest. . . . of course you are not defenseless, aes sedai. i did not mean to
suggest it. he wiped his face furiously, but it still glistened.
nynaeve opened her mouth, glanced at egwene, and seemed to change
what she had intended to say. i am going below for my things, she told the
air halfway between egwene and elayne, then turned on ellisor. captain,
make your rowboat ready. he bowed and scurried away even before she
turned for the hatch, and was shouting for men to put the boat over the side
before she was below.


 if one of you says up,  elayne murmured, the other says down. if you
do not stop it, we may not reach tear.
we will reach tear, egwene said. and sooner once nynaeve realizes
she is not the wisdom any longer. we are allshe did not say accepted;
there were two many men hurrying abouton the same level, now. elayne
sighed.
in short order the rowboat had ferried them ashore, and they were standing
on the bank with walking staffs in hand, their belongings in bundles on their
backs, and hung about them in pouches and scripts. rolling grassland and
scattered copses surrounded them, though the hills were forested a few miles
in from the river. the sweeps on the blue crane were cutting up froth, but
failing to budge the vessel. egwene turned and started south without another
glance. and before nynaeve could take the lead.
when the others caught up to her, elayne gave her a reproving look.
nynaeve walked staring straight ahead. elayne told nynaeve what egwene
had said about mat and a gray man, but the older woman listened in silence
and only said, hell have to look after himself, without pausing in her
stride. after a time, the daughterheir gave up trying to make the other two
talk, and they all walked in silence.
clumps of trees close along the riverbank soon hid the blue crane, thick
growths of wateroak and willow. they did not go through the copses, small as
they were, for anything at all might be hiding in the shadows under their
branches. a few low bushes grew scattered between the thickets here close to
the river, but they were too sparse to hide a child much less a brigand, and
they were widely spaced.
if we do see brigands, egwene announced, i am going to defend myself.
there is no amyrlin looking over our shoulders here.
nynaeves mouth thinned. if need be, she told the air in front of her, we
can frighten off any brigands the way we did those whitecloaks. if we can
find no other way.
i wish you would not talk of brigands, elayne said. i would like to reach
this village without
a figure in brown and gray rose from behind a bush standing by itself
almost in front of them.


  c h a p t e r
3 8


maidens of the spear


egwene embraced saidar before the scream was well out of her mouth, and
she saw the glow around elayne, too. for an instant she wondered if ellisor
had heard their screams and would send help; the blue crane could not be
more than a mile upriver. then she was dismissing the need for help, already
weaving flows of air and fire into lightning. she could almost still hear their
yelling.
nynaeve was simply standing there with her arms crossed beneath her
breasts and a firm expression on her face, but egwene was not sure whether
that was because she was not angry enough to touch the true source, or
because she had already seen what egwene was just now seeing. the person
facing them was a woman no older than egwene herself, if somewhat taller.
she did not let go of saidar. men were sometimes silly enough to think a
woman was harmless merely because she was a woman; egwene had no such
illusions. in a corner of her mind she noted that elayne was no longer
surrounded by the glow. the daughterheir must still harbor foolish notions.
she was never a seanchan prisoner.
egwene did not think many men would be stupid enough to think the
woman in front of them was not dangerous, even though her hands were
empty and she wore no visible weapon. bluegreen eyes and reddish hair cut
short except for a narrow tail that hung to her shoulders; soft, laced kneeboots and closefitting coat and breeches all in the shades of earth and rock.
such coloring and clothing had been described to her once; this woman was
aiel.
looking at her, egwene felt a sudden odd affinity for the woman. she


 could not understand it. she looks like rands cousin, thats why. yet even that
feelingalmost of kinshipcould not stifle her curiosity. what under the
light are aiel doing here? they never leave the waste; not since the aiel war.
she had heard all of her life how deadly aiel werethese maidens of the
spear no less than the members of the male warrior societiesbut she felt no
particular fear and, indeed, some irritation at having been afraid. with saidar
feeding the one power into her, she had no need to fear anyone. except
maybe a fully trained sister, she admitted. but certainly not one woman, even
if she is aiel.
my name is aviendha, the aiel woman said, of the nine valleys sept of
the taardad aiel. her face was as flat and expressionless as her voice. i am
far dareis mai, a maiden of the spear. she paused a moment, studying
them. you have not the look in your faces, but we saw the rings. in your
lands, you have women much like our wise ones, the women called aes
sedai. are you women of the white tower, or not?
for a moment egwene did feel unease. we? she looked around them
carefully, but saw no one behind any bush within twenty paces.
if there were others, they had to be in the next thicket, more than two
hundred paces ahead, or in the last one, twice that distance behind. too far to
threaten. unless they have bows. but they would have to be good with them.
back home, in the competitions at bel tine and sunday, only the best
bowmen shot at any distance much beyond two hundred paces.
but she still felt better knowing she could hurl a lightning bolt at anyone
who tried such a shot.
we are women of the white tower, nynaeve said calmly. she was very
obvious in not looking around for other aiel. even elayne was peering about.
whether you would consider any of us wise is another matter, nynaeve
went on. what do you want of us?
aviendha smiled. she was really quite lovely, egwene realized; the grim
expression had masked it. you talk as the wise ones do. to the point, and
small suffering of fools. her smile faded, but her voice remained calm. one
of us lies gravely hurt, perhaps dying. the wise ones often heal those who
would surely die without them, and i have heard aes sedai can do more. will
you aid her?
egwene almost shook her head in confusion. a friend of hers is dying? she
sounds as if she is asking if well lend her a cup of barley flour!
i will help her if i can, nynaeve said slowly. i cannot make promises,


 aviendha. she may die despite anything i can do.
death comes for us all, the aiel said. we can only choose how to face it
when it comes. i will take you to her.
two women in aiel garb stood up no more than ten paces away, one out of
a little fold in the ground that egwene would not have supposed could hide a
dog, and the other in grass that reached only halfway to her knees. they
lowered their black veils as they stoodthat gave her another jolt; she was
sure elayne had told her the aiel only hid their faces when they might have to
do killingand settled the cloth that had wrapped their heads about their
shoulders. one had the same reddish hair as aviendha, with gray eyes, the
other dark blue eyes and hair like fire. neither was any older than egwene or
elayne, and both looked ready to use the short spears in their hands.
the woman with fiery hair handed aviendha weapons; a long, heavybladed knife to belt at her waist, and a bristling quiver for the other side; a
dark, curved bow that had the dull shine of horn, in a case to fasten on her
back; and four short spears with long points to grip in her left hand along with
a small, round hide buckler. aviendha wore them as naturally as a woman in
emonds field would wear a scarf, just as her companions did. come, she
said, and started for the thicket they had already passed.
egwene finally released saidar. she suspected all three of the aiel could
stab her with those spears before she could do anything about it, if that was
what they wanted, but though they were wary, she did not think they would.
and what if nynaeve cant heal their friend? i wish she would ask before she
makes these decisions that involve all of us!
as they headed for the trees, the aiel scanned the land around them as if
they expected the empty landscape to hold enemies as adept at hiding as
themselves. aviendha strode ahead, and nynaeve kept up with her.
i am elayne of house trakand, egwenes friend said as if making
conversation, daughterheir to morgase, queen of andor.
egwene stumbled. light, is she mad? i know andor fought them in the aiel
war. it might be twenty years, but they say aiel have long memories.
but the flamehaired aiel closest to her only said, i am bain, of the black
rock sept of the shaarad aiel.
i am chiad, the shorter, blonder woman on her other side said, of the
stones river sept of the goshien aiel.
bain and chiad glanced at egwene; their expressions did not change, but


 she had the feeling they thought she was showing bad manners.
i am egwene alvere, she told them. they seemed to expect more, so she
added, daughter of marin alvere, of emonds field, in the two rivers.
that seemed to satisfy them, in a way, but she would have bet they
understood it no more than she did all these septs and clans. it must mean
families, in some way.
you are firstsisters? bain seemed to be taking in all three of them.
egwene thought they must mean sisters as it was used for aes sedai, and
said yes, just as elayne said no.
chiad and bain exchanged a very quick look that suggested they were
talking to women who might not be completely whole in their minds.
firstsister, elayne told egwene as if she were lecturing, means women
who have the same mother. secondsister means their mothers are sisters.
she turned her words to the aiel. we neither of us know a great deal of your
people. i ask you to excuse our ignorance. i sometimes think of egwene as a
firstsister, but we are not blood kin.
then why do you not speak the words before your wise ones? chiad
asked. bain and i became firstsisters.
egwene blinked. how can you become firstsisters? either you have the
same mother, or you do not. i do not mean to offend. most of what i know
about the maidens of the spear comes from the little elayne has told me. i
know you fight in battle and dont care for men, but no more than that.
elayne nodded; the way she had described the maidens to egwene had
sounded much like a cross between female warders and the red ajah.
that look flashed back across the aiels faces, as if they were not certain
how much sense egwene and elayne had.
we do not care for men? chiad murmured as if puzzled.
bain knotted her brow in thought. what you say comes near truth, yet
misses it completely. when we wed the spear, we pledge to be bound to no
man or child. some do give up the spear, for a man or a childher
expression said she herself did not understand thisbut once given up, the
spear cannot be taken back.
or if she is chosen to go to rhuidean, chiad put in. a wise one cannot
be wedded to the spear.
bain looked at her as if she had announced the sky was blue, or that rain


 fell from clouds. the glance she gave egwene and elayne said perhaps they
did not know these things. yes, that is true. though some try to struggle
against it.
yes, they do. chiad sounded as though she and bain were sharing
something between them.
but i have gone far from the trail of my explanation, bain went on. the
maidens do not dance the spears with one another even when our clans do,
but the shaarad aiel and the goshien aiel have held blood feud between
them over four hundred years, so chiad and i felt our wedding pledge was not
enough. we went to speak the words before the wise ones of our clansshe
risking her life in my hold, and i in hersto bond us as firstsisters. as is
proper for firstsisters who are maidens, we guard each others backs, and
neither will let a man come to her without the other. i would not say we do
not care for men. chiad nodded, with just the hint of a smile. have i made
the truth clear to you, egwene?
yes, egwene said faintly. she glanced at elayne and saw the
bewilderment in her blue eyes she knew must be in her own. not red ajah.
green, maybe. a cross between warders and green ajah, and i do not
understand another thing out of that. the truth is quite clear to me, now,
bain. thank you.
if the two of you feel you are firstsisters, chiad said, you should go to
your wise ones and speak the words. but you are wise ones, though young.
i do not know how it would be done in that case.
egwene did not know whether to laugh or blush. she kept having an image
of her and elayne sharing the same man. no, that is only for firstsisters who
are maidens of the spear. isnt it? elayne did have spots of color in her
cheeks, and egwene was sure she was thinking of rand. but we do not share
him, elayne. we can neither of us have him.
elayne cleared her throat. i do not think there is a need for that, chiad.
egwene and i already guard each others backs.
how can that be? chiad asked slowly. you are not wedded to the spear.
and you are wise ones. who would lift a hand against a wise one? this
confuses me. what need have you for guarding of backs?
egwene was spared having to come up with an answer by their arrival at
the copse. there were two more aiel under the trees, deep into the thicket, but
next to the river. jolien, of the salt flat sept of the nakai aiel, a blueeyed
woman with redgold hair nearly the color of elaynes, was watching over


 dailin, of aviendhas sept and clan. sweat matted dailins hair, making it a
darker red, and she only opened her gray eyes once, when they first came
near, then closed them again. her coat and shirt lay beside her, and red stained
the bandages wrapped around her middle.
she took a sword, aviendha said. some of those fools that the oathbreaking treekillers call soldiers thought we were another handful of the
bandits who infest this land. we had to kill them to convince them otherwise,
but dailin. . . . can you heal her, aes sedai?
nynaeve went to her knees beside the injured woman and lifted the
bandages enough to peer under them. she winced at what she saw. have you
moved her since she was hurt? there is scabbing, but it has been broken.
she wanted to die near water, aviendha said. she glanced once at the
river, then quickly away again. egwene thought she might have shivered, too.
fools! nynaeve began rummaging in her pouch of herbs. you could
have killed her moving her with an injury like that. she wanted to die near
water! she said disgustedly. just because you carry weapons like men
doesnt mean you have to think like them. she pulled a deep wooden cup out
of the bag and pushed it at chiad. fill that. i need water to mix these so she
can drink them.
chiad and bain stepped to the rivers edge and returned together. their
faces never changed, but egwene thought they had almost expected the river
to reach up and grab them.
if we had not brought her here to the . . . river, aes sedai, aviendha said,
we would never have found you, and she would have died anyway.
nynaeve snorted and began sifting powdered herbs into the cup of water,
muttering to herself. corenroot helps make blood, and dogwort for knitting
flesh, and healall, of course, and. . . . her mutters trailed off into whispers
too low to hear. aviendha was frowning at her.
the wise ones use herbs, aes sedai, but i had not heard that aes sedai
used them.
i use what i use! nynaeve snapped and went back to sorting through her
powders and whispering to herself.
she truly does sound like a wise one, chiad told bain softly, and the
other woman gave a tight nod.
dailin was the only aiel without her weapons in hand, and they all looked


 ready to use them in a heartbeat. nynaeve surely isnt soothing anyone,
egwene thought. get them talking about something. anything. nobody feels
like fighting if theyre talking of something peaceful.
do not be offended, she said carefully, but i notice you are all uneasy
about the river. it does not grow violent unless there is a storm. you could
swim in it if you wanted, though the current is strong away from the banks.
elayne shook her head.
the aiel looked blank; aviendha said, i saw a mana shienarando this
swimming . . . once.
i dont understand, egwene said. i know there isnt much water in the
waste, but you said you were stones river sept, jolien. surely you have
swum in the stones river? elayne looked at her as if she were mad.
swim, jolien said awkwardly. it means . . . to get in the water? all that
water? with nothing to hold on to. she shuddered. aes sedai, before i
crossed the dragonwall, i had never seen flowing water i could not step
across. the stones river. . . . some claim it had water in it once, but that is
only boasting. there are only the stones. the oldest records of the wise ones
and the clan chief say there was never anything but stones since the first day
our sept broke off from the high plain sept and claimed that land. swim!
she gripped her spears as if to fight the very word. chiad and bain moved a
pace further from the riverbank.
egwene sighed. and colored when she met elaynes eye. well, i am not a
daughterheir, to know all these things. i will learn them, though. as she
looked around at the aiel women, she realized that far from soothing them,
she had put them even more on edge. if they try anything, i will hold them
with air. she had no idea whether she could seize four people at once, but she
opened herself to saidar, wove the flows in air and held them ready. the
power pulsed in her with eagerness to be used. no glow surrounded elayne,
and she wondered why. elayne looked right at her and shook her head.
i would never harm an aes sedai, aviendha said abruptly. i would have
you know that. whether dailin lives or dies, it makes no difference in that. i
would never use thisshe lifted one short spear a trifleagainst any
woman. and you are aes sedai. egwene had the sudden feeling that the
woman was trying to soothe them.
i knew that, elayne said, as if talking to aviendha, but her eyes told
egwene the words were for her. no one knows much of your people, but i
was taught that aiel never harm women unless they arewhat did you call it?


 wedded to the spear.
bain seemed to think elayne was failing to see truth clearly again. that is
not exactly the way of it, elayne. if a woman not wedded came at me with
weapons, i would drub her until she knew better of it. a man. . . . a man
might think a woman of your lands was wedded if she bore weapons; i do not
know. men can be strange.
of course, elayne said. but so long as we do not attack you with
weapons, you will not try to harm us. all four aiel looked shocked, and she
gave egwene a quick significant look.
egwene held on to saidar anyway. just because elayne had been taught
something did not mean it was true, even if the aiel said the same thing. and
saidar felt . . . good in her.
nynaeve lifted up dailins head and began pouring her mixture into the
womans mouth. drink, she said firmly. i know it tastes bad, but drink it
all. dailin swallowed, choked, and swallowed again.
not even then, aes sedai, aviendha told elayne. she kept her eyes on
dailin and nynaeve, though. it is said that once, before the breaking of the
world, we served the aes sedai, though no story says how. we failed in that
service. perhaps that is the sin that sent us to the threefold land; i do not
know. no one knows what the sin was, except maybe the wise ones, or the
clan chiefs, and they do not say. it is said if we fail the aes sedai again, they
will destroy us.
drink it all, nynaeve muttered. swords! swords and muscles and no
brains!
we are not going to destroy you, elayne said firmly, and aviendha
nodded.
as you say, aes sedai. but the old stories are all clear on one point. we
must never fight aes sedai. if you bring your lightnings and your balefire
against me, i will dance with them, but i will not harm you.
stabbing people, nynaeve growled. she lowered dailins head, and laid a
hand on the womans brow. dailins eyes had closed again. stabbing
women! aviendha shifted her feet and frowned again, and she was not alone
among the aiel.
balefire, egwene said. aviendha, what is balefire?
the aiel woman turned her frown on her. do you not know, aes sedai? in


 the old stories, aes sedai wielded it. the stories make it a fearsome thing, but
i know no more. it is said we have forgotten much that we once knew.
perhaps the white tower has forgotten much, too, egwene said. i knew
of it in that . . . dream, or whatever it was. it was as real as telaranrhiod. id
gamble with mat on that.
no right! nynaeve snapped. no one has a right to tear bodies so! it is
not right!
is she angry? aviendha asked uneasily. chiad and bain and jolien
exchanged worried looks.
it is all right, elayne said.
it is better than all right, egwene added. she is getting angry, and it is
much better than all right.
the glow of saidar surrounded nynaeve suddenlyegwene leaned
forward, trying to see, and so did elayneand dailin started up with a
scream, eyes wide open. in an instant, nynaeve was easing her back down,
and the glow faded. dailins eyes slid shut, and she lay there panting.
i saw it, egwene thought. i . . . think i did. she was not sure she had even
been able to make out all the many flows, much less the way nynaeve had
woven them together. what nynaeve had done in those few seconds had
seemed like weaving four carpets at once while blindfolded.
nynaeve used the bloody bandages to wipe dailins stomach, smearing
away bright red new blood and black crusts of dried old. there was no
wound, no scar, only healthy skin considerably paler than dailins face.
with a grimace, nynaeve took the bloody cloths, stood up, and threw them
into the river. wash the rest of that off of her, she said, and put some
clothes back on her. shes cold. and be ready to feed her. she will be
hungry. she knelt by the water to wash her hands.


 c h a p t e r
3 9


threads in the pattern


jolien put an unsteady hand to where the wound had been in dailins middle;
when she touched smooth skin, she gasped as if she had not believed her own
eyes.
nynaeve straightened, drying her hands on her cloak. egwene had to admit
that good wool did better for a towel than silk or velvet. i said wash her and
get some clothes on her, nynaeve snapped.
yes, wise one, jolien said quickly, and she, chiad, and bain all leaped to
obey.
a short laugh burst from aviendha, a laugh almost at the edge of tears. i
have heard that a wise one in the jagged spire sept is said to be able to do
this, and one in the four holes sept, but i always thought it was boasting.
she drew a deep breath, regaining her composure. aes sedai, i owe you a
debt. my water is yours, and the shade of my septhold will welcome you.
dailin is my secondsister. she saw nynaeves uncomprehending look and
added, she is my mothers sisters daughter. close blood, aes sedai. i owe a
blood debt.
if i have any blood to spill, nynaeve said dryly, i will spill it myself. if
you wish to repay me, tell me if there is a ship at jurene. the next village
south of here?
the village where the soldiers fly the white lion banner? aviendha said.
there was a ship there when i scouted yesterday. the old stories mention
ships, but it was strange to see one.
the light send it is still there. nynaeve began putting away her folded


 papers of powdered herbs. i have done what i can for the girl, aviendha, and
we must go on. all that she needs now is food and rest. and try not to let
people stick swords in her.
what comes, comes, aes sedai, the aiel woman replied.
aviendha, egwene said, feeling as you do about rivers, how do you
cross them? i am sure there is at least one river nearly as big as the erinin
between here and the waste.
the alguenya, elayne said. unless you went around it.
you have many rivers, but some have things called bridges where we had
need to cross, and others we could wade. for the rest, jolien remembered that
wood floats. she slapped the trunk of a tall whitewood. these are big, but
they float as well as a branch. we found dead ones and made ourselves a . . .
ship . . . a little ship, of two or three lashed together to cross the big river.
she said it matteroffactly.
egwene stared in wonder. if she were as afraid of something as the aiel
obviously were of rivers, could she make herself face it the way they did? she
did not think so. what about the black ajah, a small voice asked. have you
stopped being afraid of them? that is different, she told it. theres no bravery
in that. i either hunt them, or else i sit like a rabbit waiting for a hawk. she
quoted the old saying to herself. it is better to be the hammer than the nail.
we had best be on our way, nynaeve said.
in a moment, elayne told her. aviendha, why have you come all this
way and put up with such hardship?
aviendha shook her head disgustedly. we have not come far at all; we
were among the last to set out. the wise ones nipped at me like wild dogs
circling a calf, saying i had other duties. suddenly she grinned, gesturing to
the other aiel. these stayed back to taunt me in my misery, so they said, but
i do not think the wise ones would have let me go if they had not been there
to companion me.
we seek the one foretold, bain said. she was holding a sleeping dailin so
chiad could slip a shirt of brown linen onto her. he who comes with the
dawn.
he will lead us out of the threefold land, chiad added. the
prophecies say he was born of far dareis mai.
elayne looked startled. i thought you said the maidens of the spear were


 not allowed to have children. i am sure i was taught that. bain and chiad
exchanged those looks again, as if elayne had come near truth and yet missed
it once more.
if a maiden bears a child, aviendha explained carefully, she gives the
child to the wise ones of her sept, and they pass the child to another woman
in such a way that none knows whose child it is. she, too, sounded as if she
were explaining that stone is hard. every woman wants to foster such a child
in the hope she may raise he who comes with the dawn.
or she may give up the spear and wed the man, chiad said, and bain
added, there are sometimes reasons one must give up the spear.
aviendha gave them a level look, but continued as if they had not spoken.
except that now the wise ones say he is to be found here, beyond the
dragonwall. blood of our blood mixed with the old blood, raised by an
ancient blood not ours. i do not understand it, but the wise ones spoke in
such a way as to leave no doubts. she paused, obviously choosing her words.
you have asked many questions, aes sedai. i wish to ask one. you must
understand that we look for omens and signs. why do three aes sedai walk a
land where the only hand without a knife in it is a hand too weak with hunger
to grasp the hilt? where do you go?
tear, nynaeve said briskly, unless we stay here talking until the heart of
the stone crumbles to dust. elayne began adjusting the cord of her bundle
and the strap of her scrip for walking, and after a moment egwene did the
same.
the aiel women were looking at one another, jolien frozen in the act of
closing dailins graybrown coat. tear? aviendha said in a cautious tone.
three aes sedai walking through a troubled land on their way to tear. this
is a strange thing. why do you go to tear, aes sedai?
egwene glanced at nynaeve. light, a moment ago they were laughing, and
now theyre as tense as they ever were.
we hunt some evil women, nynaeve said carefully. dark friends.
shadowrunners. jolien twisted her mouth around the word as if she had
bitten into a rotten apple.
shadowrunners in tear, bain said, and as if part of the same sentence
chiad added, and three aes sedai seeking the heart of the stone.
i did not say we were going to the heart of the stone, nynaeve said
sharply. i merely said i did not want to stay here till it falls to dust. egwene,


 elayne, are you ready? she started out of the thicket without waiting for an
answer, walking staff thumping the ground and long strides carrying her
south.
egwene and elayne made hasty goodbyes before following after her. the
four aiel on their feet stood watching them go.
when the two of them were a little way beyond the trees, egwene said,
my heart almost stopped when you named yourself. werent you afraid they
might try to kill you, or to take you prisoner? the aiel war was not that long
ago, and whatever they said about not harming women who dont carry
spears, they looked ready enough to use those spears on anything, to me.
elayne shook her head ruefully. i have just learned how much i do not
know about the aiel, but i was taught that they do not think of the aiel war as
a war at all. from the way they behaved toward me, i think maybe that much
of what i learned is truth. or maybe it was because they think i am aes
sedai.
i know they are strange, elayne, but no one can call three years of battles
anything but a war. i do not care how much they fight among themselves, a
war is a war.
not to them. thousands of aiel crossed the spine of the world, but
apparently they saw themselves more like thieftakers, or headsmen, come
after king laman of cairhien for the crime of cutting down avendoraldera.
to the aiel, it was not a war; it was an execution.
avendoraldera, according to one of verins lectures, had been an offshoot
of the tree of life itself, brought to cairhien some five hundred years ago as
an unprecedented offer of peace from the aiel, given along with the right to
cross the waste, a right otherwise given to none but peddlers, gleemen, and
the tuathaan. much of cairhiens wealth had been built on the trade in ivory
and perfumes and spices and, most of all, silk, from the lands beyond the
waste. not even verin had any idea of how the aiel had come by a sapling of
avendesorafor one thing, the old books were clear that it made no seed; for
another, no one knew where the tree of life was, except for a few stories that
were clearly wrong, but surely the tree of life could have nothing to do with
the aielor of why the aiel had called the cairhienin the watersharers, or
insisted their trains of merchant wagons fly a banner bearing the trefoil leaf of
avendesora.
egwene supposed, grudgingly, that she could understand why they had
started a wareven if they did not think it was oneafter king laman cut


 down their gift to make a throne unlike any other in the world. lamans sin,
she had heard it called. according to verin, not only had cairhiens trade
across the waste ended with the war, but those cairhienin who ventured into
the waste now vanished. verin claimed they were said to be sold as animals
in the lands beyond the waste, but not even she understood how a man or a
woman could be sold.
egwene, elayne said, you know who he who comes with the dawn
must be, dont you?
staring at nynaeves back still well ahead of them, egwene shook her head
does she mean to race us to jurene?then almost stopped walking. you
do not mean?
elayne nodded. i think so. i do not know much of the prophecies of the
dragon, but i have heard a few lines. one i remember is, on the slopes of
dragonmount shall he be born, born of a maiden wedded to no man. egwene,
rand does look like an aiel. well, he looks like the pictures i have seen of
tigraine, too, but she vanished before he was born, and i hardly think she
could have been his mother anyway. i think rands mother was a maiden of
the spear.
egwene frowned in thought as she hurried along, running everything she
knew of rands birth through her head. he had been raised by tam althor
after kari althor died, but if what moiraine said was true, they could not be
his real mother and father. nynaeve had sometimes seemed to know some
secret about rands birth. but i will bet i couldnt pry it out of her with a fork!
they caught up to nynaeve, egwene glowering as she thought, nynaeve
staring straight ahead toward jurene and that ship, and elayne frowning at the
pair of them as if they were two children sulking over who should have the
larger piece of cake.
after a time of silent strides, elayne said, you handled that very well,
nynaeve. the healing, and the rest, too. i do not think they ever doubted you
were aes sedai. or that we all were, because of the way you bore yourself.
you did do a good job, egwene said after a minute. that was the first
time i have ever really watched what is done during a healing. it makes
making lightning look like mixing oatcake.
a surprised smile appeared on nynaeves face. thank you, she
murmured, and reached over to give egwenes hair a little tug the way she
had when egwene was a little girl.


 i am not a little girl any longer. the moment passed as quickly as it had
come, and they went on in silence once more. elayne sighed loudly.
they covered another mile, or a little more, swiftly, despite swinging in
from the river to go around the thickets along the bank. nynaeve insisted on
staying well clear of the trees. egwene thought it was silly to think more aiel
would be hiding in the copses, but the swing inland did not add much distance
to what they had to cover; none of the growths were very big.
elayne watched the trees, though, and she was the one who suddenly
screamed, look out!
egwene jerked her head around; men were stepping out from among the
trees, slings whirling round their heads. she reached for saidar, and
something struck her head, and darkness drank everything.
egwene could feel herself swaying, feel something moving under her. her
head seemed to be nothing but pain. she tried to raise a hand to her temples,
but something dug into her wrists, and her hands did not move.
better than lying there all day waiting for dark, a mans rough voice
said. who knows if another ship would come by close in? and i dont trust
that boat. it leaks.
you do better hope adden does believe you did see those rings before you
did decide, another man said. he does want fat cargoes, not women, i
think. the first man muttered something coarse about what adden could do
with his leaky boat, and the cargoes, too.
her eyes opened. silverflecked spots danced across her vision; she thought
she might be going to throw up on the ground swaying past under her head.
she was tied across the back of a horse, her wrists and ankles joined by a rope
running under its belly, her hair hanging down.
it was still daylight. she craned her neck to look around. so many roughdressed men on horses surrounded her that she could not see whether
nynaeve and elayne had been captured, as well. some of the men wore bits
of armora battered helmet, or a dented breastplate, or a jerkin sewn all over
with metal scalesbut most wore only coats that had not been cleaned in
months, if ever. from the smell, the men had not cleaned themselves in
months, either. they all wore swords, at their waists or on their backs.
rage hit her, and fear, but most of all whitehot anger. i wont be a prisoner.
i wont be bound! i wont! she reached for saidar and the pain nearly lifted


 the top of her head; she barely stifled a moan.
the horse paused for a moment of shouts and the creak of rusty hinges,
then went ahead a little further, and the men began to dismount. as they
moved apart, she could see something of where they were. a log palisade
surrounded them, built atop a large, round earthen mound, and men with bows
stood guard on a wooden walk built just high enough for them to see over the
roughhewn ends of the logs. one low, windowless log house seemed to be
built into the mounded dirt under the wall. there was no other structure
beyond a few leanto sheds. aside from the men and horses that had just
entered, the rest of the open space was filled with cook fires, and tethered
horses, and more unwashed men. there must have been at least a hundred.
caged goats and pigs and chickens filled the air with squeals and grunts and
clucks that blended with coarse shouts and laughter to make a din that pierced
her head.
her eyes found nynaeve and elayne, bound head down across saddleless
horses as she was. neither seemed to be stirring; the very end of nynaeves
braid dragged across the dirt as her horse stirred. a small hope faded; that one
of them might be free, to help whoever was held escape. light, i cannot stand
to be a prisoner again. not again. gingerly, she tried reaching for saidar
again. the pain was not so bad this timemerely as if someone had dropped
a rock on her headbut it shattered the emptiness before she could even think
of a rose.
one of thems awake! a mans panicked voice shouted.
egwene tried to hang limp and look unthreatening. how in the light could
i look threatening tied up like a sack of meal! burn me, i have to buy time. i
have to! i will not harm you, she told the sweatyfaced fellow who came
running toward her. or she tried to tell him. she was not sure how much she
had actually said before something crashed into her head again and darkness
rolled over her in a wave of nausea.
waking was easier the next time. her head still hurt, but not as much as it
had, though her thoughts did seem to spin dizzily. at least my stomach isnt.
. . . light, id better not think of that. there was a taste of sour wine and
something bitter in her mouth. strips of lamplight showed through horizontal
cracks in a crudely made wall, but she lay in darkness, on her back. on dirt,
she thought. the door did not seem to fit well either, but it looked all too
sturdy.


 she pushed herself to her hands and knees, and was surprised to find she
was not tied in any way. except for that one wall of unpeeled logs, the others
all seemed to be of rough stone. the light through the cracks was enough to
show her nynaeve and elayne lying sprawled on the dirt. there was blood on
the daughterheirs face. neither of them moved except for the rise and fall
of their chests as they breathed. egwene hesitated between trying to wake
them immediately and seeing what lay on the other side of that wall. just a
peek, she told herself. i might as well see what we have guarding us before i
wake them.
she told herself it was not because she was afraid she might be unable to
waken them. as she put her eye to one of the cracks near the door, she
thought of the blood on elaynes face and tried to remember exactly what it
was nynaeve had done for dailin.
the next room was largeit had to be all the rest of the log building she
had seenand windowless, but brightly lit with gold and silver lamps
hanging from spikes driven into the walls and the logs that made the high
ceiling. there was no fireplace. on the packed dirt floor farmhouse tables and
chairs mingled with chests covered in giltwork and inlaid with ivory. a
carpet woven in peacocks lay beside a huge canopied bed, piled deep with
filthy blankets and comforters, with elaborately carved and gilded posts.
a dozen men stood or sat around the room, but all eyes were on one large,
fairhaired man who might have been handsome if his face were cleaner. he
stood staring down at the top of a table with fluted legs and gilded scrollwork,
one hand on his sword hilt, a finger of the other pushing something she could
not make out in small circles on the tabletop.
the outer door opened, revealing night outside, and a lanky man with his
left ear gone came in. he has no come, yet, he said roughly. he was missing
two fingers on his left hand, too. i do no like dealing with that kind.
the big, fairhaired man paid him no mind, only kept moving whatever it
was on the table. three aes sedai, he murmured, then laughed. good
prices for aes sedai, if you have the belly to deal with the right buyer. if
youre ready to risk having your belly ripped out through your mouth should
you try selling him a pig in a sack. not so safe as slitting the crews throats on
a traders ship, eh, coke? not so easy, wouldnt you say?
there was a nervous stir among the other men, and the one addressed, a
stocky fellow with shifty eyes, leaned forward anxiously. they are aes
sedai, adden. she recognized that voice; the man who had made the coarse


 suggestions. they must be, adden. the rings prove it, i tell you! adden
picked up something from the table, a small circle that glinted gold in the
lamplight.
egwene gasped and felt at her fingers. they took my ring!
i do no like it, muttered the lanky man with the missing ear. aes sedai.
any one of them could kill us all. fortune prick me! you do be a stonecarved
fool, coke, and i ought to carve your throat. what if one of them do wake
before he does come?
theyll not wake for hours. that was a fat man with a hoarse voice and a
gaptoothed sneer. my granny taught me of that stuff we fed them. theyll
sleep till sunrise, and hell come long afore then.
egwene worked her mouth around the sour wine taste and the bitterness.
whatever it was, your granny lied to you. she should have strangled you in
your cradle! before this he came, this man who thought he could buy aes
sedailike a bloody seanchan!she would have nynaeve and elayne on
their feet. she crawled to nynaeve.
as near as she could tell, nynaeve seemed to be sleeping, so she began
with the simple expedient of shaking her. to her surprise, nynaeves eyes
shot open.
wha?
she got a hand over nynaeves mouth in time to stop the word. we are
being held prisoner, she whispered. there are a dozen men on the other side
of that wall, and more outside. a great many more. they gave us something
to make us sleep, but it wasnt very successful. do you remember, yet?
nynaeve pulled egwenes hand aside. i remember. her voice was soft
and grim. she grimaced and twisted her mouth, then suddenly barked a nearly
silent laugh. sleepwell root. the fools gave us sleepwell root mixed in wine.
wine near gone to vinegar, it tastes like. quick, do you remember anything of
what i taught you? what does sleepwell root do?
it clears headaches so you can sleep, egwene said just as softly. and
nearly as grimly, until she heard what she was saying. it makes you a little
drowsy, but that is all. the fat man had not listened well to what his granny
told him. all they did was help clear the pain of being hit in the head.
exactly, nynaeve said. and once we wake elayne, well give them a
thanking they wont forget. she rose, only to crouch beside the goldenhaired woman.


 i think i saw more than a hundred of them outside when they brought us
in, egwene whispered to nynaeves back. i am sure you wont mind if i use
the power as a weapon this time. and someone is apparently coming to buy
us. i mean to do something to that fellow that will make him walk in the light
till the day he dies! nynaeve was still crouched over elayne, but neither of
them was moving. what is the matter?
she is hurt badly, egwene. i think her skull is broken, and she is barely
breathing. egwene, she is dying as surely as dailin was.
cant you do something? egwene tried to remember all the flows
nynaeve had woven to heal the aiel woman, but she could recall no more
than every third thread. you have to!
they took my herbs, nynaeve muttered fiercely, her voice trembling. i
cant! not without the herbs! egwene was shocked to realize nynaeve was
on the point of tears. burn them all, i cant do it without! suddenly she
seized elaynes shoulders as if she meant to lift the unconscious woman and
shake her. burn you, girl, she rasped, i did not bring you all this way to
die! i should have left you scrubbing pots! i should have tied you up in a sack
for mat to carry to your mother! i will not let you die on me! do you hear
me? i wont allow it! saidar suddenly shone around her, and elaynes eyes
and mouth opened wide together.
egwene got her hands over elaynes mouth just in time to muffle any
sound, she thought, but as she touched her, the eddies of nynaeves healing
caught her like a straw on the edge of a whirl pool. cold froze her to the bone,
meeting heat that seared outward as if it meant to crisp her flesh; the world
vanished in a sensation of rushing, falling, flying, spinning.
when it finally ended, she was breathing hard and staring down at elayne,
who stared back over the hands she still had pressed over her womans mouth.
the last of egwenes headache was gone. even the backwash of what
nynaeve had done had apparently been enough for that. the murmur of
voices from the other room was no louder; if elayne had made any noiseor
if she hadadden and the others had not noticed.
nynaeve was on her hands and knees, head down and shaking. light! she
muttered. doing it that way . . . was like peeling off . . . my own skin. oh,
light! she peered at elayne. how do you feel, girl? egwene pulled her
hands away.
tired, elayne murmured. and hungry. where are we? there were some
men with slings. . . .


 hastily egwene told her what had happened. elaynes face began to darken
a long way before she was done.
and now, nynaeve added in a voice like iron, we are going to show
these louts what it means to meddle with us. saidar shone around her once
more.
elayne was unsteady getting to her feet, but the glow surrounded her, as
well. egwene reached out to the true source almost gleefully.
when they looked through the cracks again, to see exactly what they had to
deal with, there were three myrddraal in the room.
deadblack garb hanging unnaturally still, they stood by the table, and
every man but adden had moved as far from them as he could, till they all
had their backs against the walls and their eyes on the dirt floor. across the
table from the myrddraal, adden faced those eyeless stares, but sweat made
runnels in the dirt on his face.
the fade picked up a ring from the table. egwene saw now that it was a
much heavier circle of gold than the great serpent rings.
face pressed against the crack between two logs, nynaeve gasped softly
and fumbled at the neck of her dress.
three aes sedai, the halfman hissed, its amusement sounding like dead
things powdering to dust, and one carried this. the ring made a heavy thud
as the myrddraal tossed it back on the table.
they are the ones i seek, another of them rasped. you will be well
rewarded, human.
we must take them by surprise, nynaeve said softly. what kind of lock
holds this door?
egwene could just see the lock on the outside of the door, an iron thing on
a chain heavy enough to hold an enraged bull. be ready, she said.
she thinned one flow of earth to finer than a hair, hoping the halfmen
could not sense so small a channeling, and wove it into the iron chain, into the
tiniest bits of it.
one of the myrddraal lifted its head. another leaned across the table
toward adden. i itch, human. are you sure they sleep? adden swallowed
hard and nodded his head.
the third myrddraal turned to stare at the door to the room where egwene
and the others crouched.


 the chain fell to the floor, the myrddraal staring at it snarled, and the outer
door swung open, blackveiled death flowing in from the night.
the room erupted in screams and shouts as men clawed for their swords to
fight stabbing aiel spears. the myrddraal drew blades blacker than their garb
and fought for their lives, too. egwene had once seen six cats all fighting each
other; this was that a hundredfold. and yet in seconds, silence reigned. or
almost silence.
every human not wearing a black veil lay dead with a spear through him;
one pinned adden to the wall. two aiel lay still, as well, amid the jumble of
overturned furniture and dead. the three myrddraal stood backtoback in the
center of the room, black swords in their hands. one was clutching his side as
if wounded, though he gave no other sign of it. another had a long gash down
its pale face; it did not bleed. around them circled the five veiled aiel still
alive, crouching. from outside came screams and clashes of metal that said
more aiel still fought in the night, but in the room was a softer sound.
as they circled, the aiel drummed their spears against their small hide
bucklers. thrumthrumthrumthrum . . . thrumthrumthrumthrum . . .
thrumthrumthrumthrum. the myrddraal turned with them, and their
eyeless faces seemed uncertain, uneasy that the fear their gaze struck into
every human heart did not seem to touch these.
dance with me, shadowman, one of the aiel called suddenly, tauntingly.
he sounded like a young man.
dance with me, eyeless. that was a woman.
dance with me.
dance with me.
i think, nynaeve said, straightening, that it is time. she threw open the
door, and the three women wrapped in the glow of saidar stepped out.
it seemed as though, for the myrddraal, the aiel had ceased to exist, and
for the aiel, the myrddraal. the aiel stared at egwene and the others above
their veils as if not quite sure what they were seeing; she heard one of the
women gasp loudly. the myrddraals eyeless stare was different. egwene
could almost feel the halfmens knowledge of their own deaths in it; halfmen
knew women embracing the true source when they saw them. she was sure
she could feel a desire for her death, too, if theirs could buy hers, and an even
stronger desire to strip the soul out of her flesh and make both playthings for
the shadow, a desire to. . . .


 she had just stepped into the room, yet it seemed she had been meeting that
stare for hours. ill take no more of this, she growled, and unleashed a flow
of fire.
flames burst out of all three myrddraal, sprouting in every direction, and
they shrieked like splintered bones jamming a meatgrinder. yet she had
forgotten she was not alone, that elayne and nynaeve were with her. even as
the flames consumed the halfmen, the very air seemed suddenly to push them
together in midair, crushing them into a ball of fire and blackness that grew
smaller and smaller. their screams dug at egwenes spine, and something shot
out from nynaeves handsa thin bar of white light that made noonday sun
seem dark, a bar of fire that made molten metal seem cold, connecting her
hands to the myrddraal. and they ceased to exist as if they had never been.
nynaeve gave a startled jump, and the glow around her vanished.
what . . . what was that? elayne asked.
nynaeve shook her head; she looked as stunned as elayne sounded. i
dont know. i . . . i was so angry, so afraid, at what they wanted to. . . . i do
not know what it was.
balefire, egwene thought. she did not know how she knew, but she was
certain of it. reluctantly, she made herself release saidar; made it release her.
she did not know which was harder. and i did not see a thing of what she did!
the aiel unveiled themselves, then. a trifle hastily, egwene thought, as if
to tell her and the other two they were no longer ready to fight. three of the
aiel were male, one an older man with more than touches of gray in his dark
red hair. they were tall, these aielmen, and young or old, they had that calm
sureness in their eyes, that dangerous grace of motion egwene associated with
warders; death rode on their shoulders, and they knew it was there and were
not afraid. one of the women was aviendha. the screams and shouts outside
were dying away.
nynaeve started toward the fallen aiel.
there is no need, aes sedai, the older man said. they took shadowman
steel.
nynaeve still bent to check each, pulling their veils away so she could peel
back eyelids and feel throats for a pulse. when she straightened from the
second, her face was white. it was dailin. burn you! burn you! it was not
clear whether she meant dailin, or the man with gray in his hair, or aviendha,
or all aiel. i did not heal her so she could die like this!


 death comes to us all, aviendha began, but when nynaeve rounded on
her, she fell silent. the aiel exchanged glances, as if not certain whether
nynaeve might do to them what had been done to the myrddraal. it was not
fear in their eyes, only awareness.
shadowman steel kills, aviendha said, it does not wound. the older
man looked at her, a slight surprise in his eyesegwene decided that, like
lan, for this man that flicker of the eyelids was the equivalent of another
mans open astonishmentand aviendha said, they know little of some
things, rhuarc.
i am sorry, elayne said in a clear voice, that we interrupted your . . .
dance. perhaps we should not have interfered.
egwene gave her a startled look, then saw what she was doing. put them at
ease, and give nynaeve a chance to cool down. you were handling things
quite well, she said. perhaps we offended by putting our noses in.
the graying manrhuarcgave a deep chuckle. aes sedai, i for one am
glad of . . . whatever it was you did. for a moment he looked not entirely
sure of that, but in the next he had his good temper back. he had a good
smile, and a strong, square face; he was handsome, if a little old. we could
have killed them, but three shadowmen. . . . they would have killed two or
three of us, certainly, perhaps all, and i cannot say we would have finished
them all. for the young, death is an enemy they wish to try their strength
against. for those of us a little older, she is an old friend, an old lover, but one
we are not eager to meet again soon.
nynaeve seemed to relax with his speech, as if meeting an aiel who did not
seem anxious to die had leached the tension out of her. i should thank you,
she said, and i do. i will admit i am surprised to see you, though. aviendha,
did you expect to find us here? how?
i followed you. the aiel woman seemed unembarrassed. to see what
you would do. i saw the men take you, but i was too far back to help. i was
sure you must see me if i came too close, so i stayed a hundred paces behind.
by the time i saw you could not help yourselves, it was too late to try alone.
i am sure you did what you could, egwene said faintly. she was just a
hundred paces behind us? light, the brigands never saw anything.
aviendha took her words as urging to tell more. i knew where coram
must be, and he knew where dhael and luaine were, and they knew. . . . she
paused, frowning at the older man. i did not expect to find any clan chief,
much less my own, among those who came. who leads the taardad aiel,


 rhuarc, with you here?
rhuarc shrugged as if it were of no account. the sept chiefs will take their
turns, and try to decide if they truly wish to go to rhuidean when i die. i
would not have come, except that amys and bair and melaine and seana
stalked me like ridgecats after a wild goat. the dreams said i must go. they
asked if i truly wanted to die old and fat in a bed.
aviendha laughed as if at a great joke. i have heard it said that a man
caught between his wife and a wise one often wishes for a dozen old enemies
to fight instead. a man caught between a wife and three wise ones, and the
wife a wise one herself, must consider trying to slay sightblinder.
the thought came to me. he frowned down at something on the floor;
three great serpent rings, egwene saw, and a much heavier golden ring made
for a mans large finger. it still does. all things must change, but i would not
be a part of that change if i could set myself aside from it. three aes sedai,
traveling to tear. the other aiel glanced at one another as if they did not
want egwene and her companions to notice.
you spoke of dreams, egwene said. do your wise ones know what
their dreams mean?
some do. if you would know more than that, you must speak to them.
perhaps they will tell an aes sedai. they do not tell men, except what the
dreams say we must do. he sounded tired, suddenly. and that is usually
what we would avoid, if we could.
he stooped to pick up the mans ring. on it, a crane flew above a lance and
crown; egwene knew it now. she had seen it often before, dangling about
nynaeves neck on a leather cord. nynaeve stepped on the other rings to
snatch it out of his hand; her face was flushed, with anger and too many other
emotions for egwene to read. rhuarc made no move to take it back, but went
on in the same weary tone.
and one of them carries a ring i have heard of as a boy. the ring of
malkieri kings. they rode with the shienarans against the aiel in my fathers
time. they were good in the dance of the spears. but malkier fell to the
blight. it is said only a child king survived, and he courts the death that took
his land as other men court beautiful women. truly, this is a strange thing,
aes sedai. of all the strange sights i thought i might see when melaine
harried me out of my own hold and over the dragonwall, none has been so
strange as this. the path you set me is one i never thought my feet would
follow.


 i set no paths for you, nynaeve said sharply. all i want is to continue
my journey. these men had horses. we will take three of them and be on our
way.
in the night, aes sedai? rhuarc said. is your journey so urgent that you
would travel these dangerous lands in the dark?
nynaeve struggled visibly before saying, no. in a firmer tone she added,
but i mean to leave with the sunrise.
the aiel carried the dead outside the palisade, but neither egwene nor her
companions wanted to use the filthy bed adden had slept in. they picked up
their rings and slept under the sky in their cloaks and the blankets the aiel
gave them.
when dawn pearled the sky to the east, the aiel produced a breakfast of
tough, dried meategwene hesitated over that until aviendha told her it was
goatflatbread that was almost as difficult to chew as the stringy meat, and a
blueveined white cheese that had a tart taste and was hard enough to make
elayne murmur that the aiel must practice by chewing rocks. but the
daughterheir ate as much as egwene and nynaeve together. the aiel turned
the horses loosethey did not ride unless they had to, aviendha explained,
sounding as if she herself would as soon run on blistered feetafter choosing
out the three best for egwene and the others. they were all tall and nearly as
big as warhorses, with proud necks and fierce eyes. a black stallion for
nynaeve, a roan mare for elayne, and a gray mare for egwene.
she chose to call the gray mist, in the hope that a gentle name might soothe
her, and indeed, mist did seem to step lightly as they rode south, just as the
sun lifted a red rim above the horizon.
the aiel accompanied them afoot, all those who had survived the fight.
three more had died aside from the two the myrddraal killed. they were
nineteen, altogether, now. they loped along easily alongside the horses. at
first, egwene tried holding mist to a slow walk, but the aiel thought this very
funny.
i will race you ten miles, aviendha said, and we shall see who wins,
your horse or i.
i will race you twenty! rhuarc called, laughing.
egwene thought they might actually be serious, and when she and the
others let their horses walk at a quicker pace, the aiel certainly showed no
sign of falling back.


 when the thatched rooftops of jurene came in sight, rhuarc said, fare you
well, aes sedai. may you always find water and shade. perhaps we will meet
again before the change comes. he sounded grim. as the aiel curved away
to the south, aviendha and chiad and bain each raised a hand in farewell.
they did not seem to be slowing down now that they no longer ran with the
horses; if anything, they ran a little faster. egwene had a suspicion they meant
to maintain that pace until they reached wherever it was they were going.
what did he mean by that? she asked.  perhaps we will meet again
before the change? elayne shook her head.
it does not matter what he meant, nynaeve said. i am just as glad they
came last night, but i am glad to have them gone, too. i hope there is a ship
here.
jurene itself was a small place, all wooden houses and none more than a
single story, but the white lion banner of andor flew over it on a tall staff,
and fifty of the queens guards held it, in red coats with long white collars
beneath shining breastplates. they had been placed there, their captain said,
to make a safe haven for refugees who wished to flee to andor, but fewer
such came every day. most went to villages further downriver, now, nearer
aringill. it was a good thing the three women had come when they did, as he
expected to receive orders returning his company to andor any day. the few
inhabitants of jurene would likely go with them, leaving what remained for
brigands and the cairhienin soldiers of warring houses.
elayne kept her face hidden in the hood of her sturdy wool cloak, but none
of the soldiers seemed to associate the girl with redgold hair with their
daughterheir. some asked her to stay; egwene was not sure whether elayne
was pleased or shocked. she herself told the men who asked her that she had
no time for them. it was nice, in an odd way, to be asked; she certainly had no
wish to kiss any of these fellows, but it was pleasant to be reminded that some
men, at least, thought she was as pretty as elayne. nynaeve slapped one
mans face. that almost made egwene laugh, and elayne smiled openly;
egwene thought nynaeve had been pinched, and despite the glare on her face,
she did not look entirely displeased, either.
they were not wearing their rings. it had not taken much effort on
nynaeves part to convince them that one place they did not want to be taken
for aes sedai was tear, especially if the black ajah was there. egwene had
hers in her pouch with the stone terangreal; she touched it often to remind
herself they were still there. nynaeve wore hers on the cord that held lans
heavy ring between her breasts.


 there was a ship in jurene, tied to the single stone dock sticking into the
erinin. not the ship aviendha had seen, it seemed, but still a ship. egwene
was dismayed when she saw it. twice as wide as the blue crane, the darter
belied its name with a bluff bow as round as its captain.
that worthy fellow blinked at nynaeve and scratched his ear when she
asked if his vessel was fast. fast? i am full of fancy wood from shienar and
rugs from kandor. what need to be fast with a cargo like that? prices only go
up. yes, i suppose there are faster ships behind me, but theyll not put in here.
i would not have stopped myself if i hadnt found worms in the meat. fool
notion that theyd have meat to sell in cairhien. the blue crane? aye, i saw
ellisor hung up on something upriver this morning. hell not get off soon, im
thinking. thats what a fast ship brings you.
nynave paid their faresand twice as much again for the horseswith
such a look on her face that neither egwene nor elayne spoke to her until long
after the darter had wallowed away from jurene.


 c h a p t e r
4 0


a hero in the night


leaning on the rail, mat watched the walled town of aringill come closer as
the sweeps worked the gray gull in toward the long, tarredtimber docks.
protected by high stone wingwalls that thrust out into the river, those docks
swarmed with people, and more were leaving the ships of various sizes that
lay tied all along them. some of the people pushed barrows, or pulled sledges
or tallwheeled carts, all piled high with furniture and chests lashed in place,
but most carried bundles on their backs, if that. not everyone bustled. many
men and women huddled together uncertainly, and children clung crying to
their legs. soldiers in red coats and shiny breastplates kept trying to make
them move off the docks into the town, but most seemed too frightened to
move.
mat turned and shaded his eyes to peer at the river they were leaving. the
erinin was busier here than he had seen it south of tar valon, with nearly a
dozen vessels under way in sight, ranging from a long, sharpprowed splinter
darting upriver against the current, pushed by two triangular sails, to a wide,
bluffbowed ship with square sails, still wallowing along well to the north.
nearly half the ships he could see had nothing to do with the river trade,
though. two broadbeamed craft with empty decks were lumbering across the
river, toward a smaller town on the far bank, while three others labored back
toward aringill, their decks packed with people like barrels of fish. the
setting sun, still its own height above the horizon, shadowed a banner flying
over that other town. that shore was cairhien, but he did not need to see the
banner to know it was the white lion of andor. there had been talk enough
in the few andoran villages where the gray gull had stopped briefly.


 he shook his head. politics did not interest him. as long as they dont try
telling me again im an andorman just because of some map. burn me, they
might even try to make me fight in their bloody army, if this cairhien business
spreads. following orders. light! with a shiver, he turned back to aringill.
barefoot men on the gray gull were readying ropes to toss to others on the
docks.
captain mallia was eyeing him from back by the tiller. the fellow had
never given up his efforts to ingratiate himself with them, his attempts to learn
what their important mission was. mat had finally shown him the sealed letter
and told him that he was carrying it from the daughterheir to the queen. a
personal message from a daughter to her mother; no more. mallia had only
seemed to hear the words queen morgase.
mat grinned to himself. a deep coat pocket held two purses fatter than
when he had boarded the vessel; he had enough loose coin to more than fill
another two. his luck had not been quite so good as on that first, strange night
when the dice and everything else had seemed to go crazy, but still it was
good enough. after the third night, mallia had given up trying to show his
friendliness by gambling, but his money chest was already lighter by then. it
would be lighter still after aringill. mallia had need to restock his foodmat
glanced at the people milling on the docksif he could, here, at any price.
the grin faded as his thoughts went back to the letter. a little work with a
hot knife blade, and the golden lily seal had been lifted. he had found
nothing: elayne was studying hard and making progress and eager to learn.
she was a dutiful daughter, and the amyrlin seat had punished her for
running away and told her never to speak of it again, so her mother would
understand why she could not say more. she said she had been raised to the
accepted, and was that not wonderful, so soon, and she was being trusted
with greater duties now, and would have to leave tar valon for just a short
time on the service of the amyrlin herself. her mother was not to worry.
it was all very well for her to tell morgase not to worry. it was him she had
landed in the soup kettle. this silly letter had to be the reason those men had
come after him, but even thom had been able to make nothing of it, though
he muttered about ciphers and codes and the game of houses.
mat had the letter safe in the lining of his coat, now, its seal replaced, and
he was willing to bet no one would ever know. if someone wanted it badly
enough to kill him for it, they might try again. i told you id deliver it,
nynaeve, and i bloody will, no matter who tries to stop me. even so, he would
have words to say the next time he saw those three irritating womenif i


 ever do. light, i never thought of thatwords he did not think they would
enjoy hearing.
as the crewmen hurled their lines onto the dock, thom came on deck, his
instrument cases on his back and his bundle in one hand. even with a limp he
strutted to the rail, giving the tail of his cloak little flourishes to make the
colored patches flutter, and blowing out his long, white mustaches
importantly.
nobody is watching, thom, mat said. i dont think they would even see
a gleeman unless he had food in his hands.
thom stared at the docks. light! i had heard it was bad, but i did not
expect this! poor fools. half of them look as if they are starving. it may cost
us one of your purses for a room tonight. and the other for a meal, if you
intend to keep on the way youve been going. nearly made me ill to watch
you. you try eating that way where those people down there can see you, and
you may have your brains battered out.
mat only smiled at him.
mallia came stumping down the deck, tugging the point of his beard, as the
gray gull was warped into her berth. crewmen ran to set a gangplank, and
sanor stood guard on it, heavy arms folded across his chest, in case the throng
on the docks tried to board. none of them did.
so you will be leaving me here, mallia told mat. the captains smile was
not as ready as it might have been. are you certain there is nothing i can do
to help further? burn my soul, i never saw such a rabble! those soldiers
ought to clear the dockswith the sword, if need be!so decent traders can
do business. perhaps sanor can make a path through this scum to your inn for
you.
so youll know where we are staying? not bloody likely. i had thought of
eating before i went ashore, and maybe a game of dice to pass the time.
mallias face went white. but i think i would like a steady floor under me for
my next meal. so we will leave you now, captain. it has been an enjoyable
voyage.
while relief still battled consternation on the captains face, mat picked up
his things from the deck and, using the quarterstaff as a walking stick, made
his way to the gangplank with thom. mallia followed as far as the head of the
plank, murmuring regrets at their departure that jumped from real to insincere
and back again. mat was certain the man hated losing a chance to ingratiate
himself with his high lord samon by learning details of a pact between


 andor and tar valon.
as mat and the gleeman pushed through the crowds, thom muttered, i
know the man is far from likable, but why do you have to keep taunting him?
wasnt it enough that you ate every scrap of what he thought would feed him
all the way to tear?
i have not been eating it all for nearly two days. the hunger had simply
been gone one morning, to his great relief. it had been as if tar valon had
loosed its last hold on him. ive been throwing most of it over the side, and a
hard job it was making sure nobody saw. among these drawn faces, many of
them childrens, it did not seem so funny anymore. mallia deserved taunting.
what about that ship, yesterday? the one that was stuck on a mudbank or
something. he could have stopped to help, but he would not go near it
however much they shouted. there was a woman with long, dark hair ahead
who might have been pretty if she had not looked so bone weary, peering into
the face of every man who passed her as if looking for someone; a boy little
taller than her waist and two girls shorter clung to her, all crying. all that
talk about river brigands and traps. it didnt look like any trap to me.
thom dodged around a highwheeled carta cage holding two squealing
pigs was lashed atop the canvascovered moundand nearly tripped over a
sledge being pulled, by a man and a woman. and you go out of your way to
help people, do you? strange how that has escaped my eye.
ill help anyone who can pay, mat said firmly. only fools in stories do
something for nothing.
the two girls sobbed into their mothers skirts while the boy fought his
tears. the womans deepset eyes rested on mat for a moment, studying his
face, before drifting on; they looked as if she wished she could weep, too. on
impulse he dug a fistful of loose coins out of his pocket without looking to see
what they were and pressed them into her hand. she gave a start of surprise,
stared at the gold and silver in her hand with incomprehension that quickly
turned to a smile, and opened her mouth, tears of gratitude filling her eyes.
buy them something to eat, he said quickly, and hurried on before she
could speak. he noticed thom looking at him. what are you gawking at?
coin comes easily as long as i can find somebody who likes to dice. thom
nodded slowly, but mat was not sure he had gotten his point across. bloody
childrens crying was getting on my nerves, thats all. fool gleeman will
probably expect me to give gold away to every waif that comes along, now.
fool! for an uncomfortable moment, he was not certain whether the last had


 been meant for thom or himself.
taking himself in hand, he avoided looking at any face long enough to
really see it until he found the one he wanted, at the foot of the dock. the
helmetless soldier in red coat and breastplate, urging people into the town,
had the grizzled look of a squadman, an experienced leader of ten or so.
squinting into the setting sun, he reminded mat of uno, though he had both
his eyes. he looked almost as tired as the people he was chivying. move
along, he was shouting in a hoarse voice. you cant bloody stay here. move
along. into the town with you.
mat stationed himself squarely in front of the soldier and put on a smile.
your pardon, captain, but can you tell me where i might find a decent inn?
and a stable with good horses to sell. we have a long way to go, come
morning.
the soldier eyed him up and down, examined thom and his gleemans
cloak, then shifted back to mat. captain, is it? well, boy, youll have the
dark ones own luck if you find a stable to sleep in. most of this lot are
sleeping under hedges. and if you find a horse that hasnt been slaughtered
for cooking, youll likely have to fight the man who owns it to make him
sell.
eating horse! thom muttered disgustedly. has it really become that bad
on this side of the river? isnt the queen sending food?
it is bad, gleeman. the soldier looked as if he wanted to spit. theyre
crossing over faster than the mills can grind flour, or wagons carry foodstuffs
from the farms. well, it will not last much longer. the order has come down.
tomorrow, we stop letting anyone across, and if they try, we send them back.
he scowled at the people milling on the dock as if it were all their fault, then
brought the same hard look to bear on mat. you are taking up space, traveler.
move along. his voice rose to a shout again, directed at everyone within
hearing. move along! you cannot bloody stay here! move along!
mat and thom joined the thin stream of people, carts, and sledges flowing
toward the gates in the town wall, and into aringill.
the main streets were paved with flat gray stones, but they were crowded
with so many people that it was difficult to see the stones under your own
boots. most appeared to be moving aimlessly, with nowhere to go, and those
who had given up squatted dejectedly along the sides of the street, the lucky
ones with bundled belongings in front of them or some cherished possession
clutched in their arms. mat saw three men holding clocks, and a dozen or


 more with silver goblets or platters. the women held children to their breasts,
mainly. a babble filled the air, a low, wordless hum of worry. he pushed
through the crowd with a frown on his face, searching for the sign that would
mark an inn. the buildings were every sort, wood and brick and stone all
cheek by jowl, with roofs of tile, or slate, or thatch.
it does not sound like morgase, thom said after a time, half to himself.
his bushy eyebrows were pulled down like a white arrow pointing to his
nose.
what does not sound like her? mat asked absently.
stopping the crossings. sending people back. she always had a temper
like lightning, but she always had a soft heart, too, for anyone poor or
hungry. he shook his head.
mat saw a sign, thenthe riverman, it said, and showed a barefoot,
shirtless fellow doing a jigand turned that way, forcing an angle across the
flow with the quarterstaff. well, it had to be her. who else could it be?
forget morgase, thom. weve a long way to caemlyn, yet. first let us see
how much gold it takes to buy a bed for the night.
the common room of the riverman looked as crowded as the street
outside, and when the innkeeper heard what mat wanted, he laughed till his
chins shook. i am sleeping four to a bed, now. if my own mother came to
me, i could not give her a blanket by the fire.
as you must have noticed, thom said, his voice taking on that echoing
quality, i am a gleeman. surely you can find at least pallets in a corner in
return for me entertaining your patrons with stories and juggling, eating of
fire, and sleight of hand. the innkeeper laughed in his face.
as mat pulled him back into the street, thom growled in his normal voice,
you never gave me a chance to ask after his stable. surely i could have
gotten us a place in the hayloft, at least.
i have slept in enough stables and barns since leaving emonds field,
mat told him, and under enough bushes, too. i want a bed.
but at the next four inns he found, the innkeeper gave him the same answer
as the first; the last two almost threw him out bodily when he offered to dice
for a bed. and when the owner of the fifth told him he could not give a pallet
to the queen herselfthis at a place called the good queenhe sighed and
asked, what about your stable, then? surely we can bed down in the hayloft
for a price.


 my stable is for horses, the roundfaced man said, not that many are left
in the city. he had been polishing a silver cup; now he opened one door of a
shallow cupboard standing on top of a deep, drawered chest and placed it
inside with others; none of them matched. a tooledleather dice cup sat atop
the chest, just beyond the arc of the cupboards doors. i do not put people in
there to frighten the horses, and perhaps make off with them. those who pay
me for stabling their animals want them well tended, and ive two of my own
in there, besides. there are no beds in my stable for you.
mat eyed the dice cup thoughtfully. he pulled a gold andoran crown out of
his pocket and set it atop the chest. the next coin was a silver tar valon
mark, then a gold one, and a gold tairen crown. the innkeeper looked at the
coins and licked his plump lips. mat added two silver illianer marks and
another gold andoran crown, and looked at the roundfaced man. the
innkeeper hesitated. mat reached for the coins. the innkeepers hand reached
them first.
perhaps just the two of you would not disturb the horses too greatly.
mat smiled at him. speaking of horses, what price for those two of yours?
with saddles and bridles, of course.
i will not sell my horses, the man said, clutching the coins to his chest.
mat picked up the dice cup and rattled it. twice as much again against the
horses, saddles, and bridles. he shook his coat pocket to make the loose
coins rattle, too, to show he had more to cover the wager. my one toss
against the best of your two. he almost laughed as greed lit the innkeepers
entire face.
when mat walked into the stable, the first thing he did was check along the
halfdozen stalls with horses in them for a pair of brown geldings. they were
nondescript animals, but they were his. they needed currying badly, but
otherwise they seemed in good condition, especially considering that all the
stablemen but one had run off. the innkeeper had been extremely disparaging
of their complaints that they could no longer live on what he paid them, and
he seemed to think it a crime that the one man who remained had actually had
the audacity to say he was going home to bed just because he was tired from
doing three mens work.
five sixes, thom muttered behind him. the looks he cast around the
stable did not seem as enthralled as they might, seeing that he had suggested it
in the first place. dust motes shone in the last light of the setting sun coming
through the big doors, and the ropes used to hoist hay bales hung like vines


 from pulleys in the roof beams. the hayloft was dim in the gloom above.
when he threw four sixes and a five on his second toss, he thought youd
lost for sure, and so did i. you have not been winning every toss of late.
i win enough. mat was just as relieved not to be winning every throw.
luck was one thing, but remembering that night still sent shivers down his
back. still, for one moment as he shook that dice cup, he had all but known
what the pips would be. as he tossed the quarterstaff up into the loft, thunder
crashed in the sky. he scrambled up the ladder, calling back to thom. this
was a good idea. id think you would be happy to be in out of the rain
tonight.
most of the hay was in bales stacked against the outer walls, but there was
more than enough loose for him to make a bed with his cloak over it. thom
appeared at the top of the ladder as he was pulling two loaves of bread and a
wedge of greenveined cheese from his leather scrip. the innkeeperhis
name was jeral florryhad parted with the food for merely enough coin to
have bought one of those horses in more peaceful days. they ate while rain
began drumming on the roof, washing the food down with water from their
waterbottlesflorry had had no wine at any priceand when they were
done, thom dug out his tinderbox and thumbed his longstemmed pipe full of
tabac and settled back for a smoke.
mat was lying on his back, staring at the shadowed roof and wondering if
the rain would break before morninghe wanted that letter out of his hands
as quickly as possiblewhen he heard an axle creak into the stable. rolling
to the edge of the loft, he peered down. there was enough dusk left for him to
see.
a slender woman was straightening from the shafts of the highwheeled
cart she had just dragged in out of the rain, pulling off her cloak and
muttering to herself as she shook the wet from it. her hair was plaited in a
multitude of small braids, and her silk dresshe thought it was a pale green
was elaborately embroidered across her breasts. the dress had been fine,
once, but now it was tattered and stained. she knuckled her back, still talking
to herself in a low voice, and hurried to the stable doors to peer out into the
rain. just as hurriedly, she ducked out to pull the big doors shut, enclosing the
stable in darkness. there was a rustling below, a clink and a slosh, and
suddenly a small flare of light bloomed into a lantern in her hands. she looked
around, found a hook on a stall post, hung the lantern, and went to dig under
the roped canvas covering her cart.
she did that quickly, thom said softly around his pipe. she could have


 set fire to the stable striking flint and steel in the dark like that.
the woman came out with the end of a loaf of bread, which she gnawed as
if it were hard and her hunger did not care.
is there any of that cheese left? mat whispered. thom shook his head.
the woman began sniffing at the air, and mat realized she probably
smelled thoms tabac smoke. he was about to stand and announce their
presence when one of the stable doors opened again.
the woman crouched, ready to run, as four men walked in out of the rain,
doffing their wet cloaks to reveal pale coats with wide sleeves and embroidery
across the chest, and baggy breeches embroidered down the legs. their
clothes might be fancy, but they were all big men, and their faces were grim.
so, aludra, a man in a yellow coat said, you did not run so fast as you
thought to, eh? he had a strange accent, to mats ear.
tammuz, the woman said as if it were a curse. it is not enough that you
cause me to be cast out of the guild with your blundering, you great oxbrain
you, but now you chase after me as well. she had the same odd way of
speaking as the man. do you think that i am glad to see you?
the one called tammuz laughed. you are a very large fool, aludra, which
i always knew. had you merely gone away, you could have lived a long life in
some quiet place. but you could not forget the secrets in your head, eh? did
you believe we would not hear that you try to earn your way making what it is
the right of the guild alone to make? suddenly there was a knife in his hand.
it will be a great pleasure to cut your throat, aludra.
mat was not even aware that he had stood up until one of the doubled ropes
dangling from the ceiling was in his hands and he had launched himself out of
the loft. burn me for a bloody fool!
he only had time for that one frantic thought, and then he was plowing
through the cloaked men, sending them toppling like pins in a game of bowls.
the ropes slipped through his hands, and he fell, tumbling across the strawcovered floor himself, coins spilling from his pockets, to end up against a
stall. when he scrambled to his feet, the four men were already rising, too.
and they all had knives in their hands, now. lightblind fool! burn me! burn
me!
mat!
he looked up, and thom tossed his quarterstaff down to him. he snagged it


 out of the air just in time to knock the blade out of tammuzs fist and thump
him a sharp crack on the side of the head. the man crumpled, but the other
three were right behind, and for a hectic moment mat had all he could do with
a whirling staff to keep knife blades away from him, rapping knees and ankles
and ribs until he could land a good blow on a head. when the last man fell, he
stared at them a moment, then raised his glare to the woman. did you have
to choose this stable to be murdered in?
she slipped a slimbladed dagger back into a sheath at her belt. i would
have helped you, but i feared that you might mistake me for one of these great
buffoons if i came near with steel in my hand. and i chose this stable because
the rain is wet and so am i, and no one was watching this place.
she was older than he had thought, at least ten or fifteen years older than
he, but pretty still, with large, dark eyes and a small, full mouth that seemed
on the point of a pout. or getting ready for a kiss. he gave a small laugh and
leaned on his staff. well, what is done is done. i suppose you were not trying
to bring us trouble.
thom was climbing down from the loft, awkwardly because of his leg, and
aludra looked from him to mat. the gleeman had put his cloak back on; he
seldom let anyone see him without it, especially for the first time. this is
like a story, she said. i am rescued by a gleeman and a young heroshe
frowned at the men sprawled on the stable floorfrom these whose mothers
were pigs!
why did they want to kill you? mat asked. he said something about
secrets.
the secrets, thom said in very nearly his performing voice, of making
fireworks, unless i miss my guess. you are an illuminator, are you not? he
made a courtly bow with an elaborate swirl of his cloak. i am thom
merrilin, a gleeman, as you have seen. almost as an afterthought, he added,
and this is mat, a young man with a knack for finding trouble.
i was an illuminator, aludra said stiffly, but this great pig tammuz, he
ruined a performance for the king of cairhien, and nearly he destroyed the
chapter house, too. but me, i was mistress of the chapter house, so it was me
that the guild held responsible. her voice became defensive. i do not tell
the secrets of the guild, no matter what that tammuz says, but i will not let
myself starve while i can make fireworks. i am no more in the guild, so the
laws of the guild, they do not apply to me now.
galldrian, thom said, sounding almost as wooden as she had. well, he


 is a dead king now, and hell see no more fireworks.
the guild, she said, sounding tired, they all but blame me for this war
in cairhien, as if that one night of disaster, it made galldrian die. thom
grimaced. it seems i can no longer remain here, she went on. tammuz and
these other oxen, they will wake soon. perhaps this time they will tell the
soldiers that i stole what i have made. she eyed thom and then mat,
frowning in thought, and seemed to reach a decision. i must reward you, but
i have no money. however, i have something that is perhaps as good as gold.
maybe better. we shall see what you think.
mat exchanged glances with thom as she went to root under the canvas
covering her cart. ill help anyone who can pay. he thought a speculative light
had appeared in thoms blue eyes.
aludra separated one bundle from a number like it, a short roll of heavy,
oiled cloth almost as fat as her arms would go around. setting it down on the
straw, she undid the binding cords and unrolled the cloth across the floor.
four rows of pockets ran along the length of it, the pockets in each row larger
than those in the one before. each pocket held a waxcoated cylinder of paper
just large enough for its end, trailing a dark cord, to stick out.
fireworks, thom said. i knew it. aludra, you must not do this. you can
sell those for enough to live ten days or more at a good inn, and eat well every
day. well, anywhere but here in aringill.
kneeling beside the long strip of oiled cloth, she sniffed at him. be quiet,
you old one you. she made it sound not unkindly. i am not allowed to show
gratitude? you think i would give you this if i had no more for selling?
attend me closely.
mat squatted beside her, fascinated. he had seen fireworks twice in his life.
peddlers had brought them to emonds field, at great expense to the village
council. when he was ten, he had tried to cut one open to see what was
inside, and had caused an uproar. bran alvere, the mayor, had cuffed him;
doral barran, who had been the wisdom then, had switched him; and his
father had strapped him when he got home. nobody in the village would talk
to him for a month, except for rand and perrin, and they mostly told him
what a fool he had been. he reached out to touch one of the cylinders. aludra
slapped his hand away.
attend me first, i say! these smallest, they will make a loud bang, but no
more. they were the size of his little finger. these next, they make a bang
and a bright light. the next, they make the bang, and the light, and many


 sparkles. the lastthese were fatter than his thumbmake all of those
things, but the sparkles, they are many colors. almost like a nightflower, but
not up in the sky.
nightflower? mat thought.
you must be especially careful of these. you see, the fuse, it is very long.
she saw his blank look, and waggled one of the long, dark cords at him.
this, this!
where you put the fire, he muttered. i know that. thom made a sound
in his throat and stroked his mustaches with a knuckle as if covering a smile.
aludra grunted. where you put the fire. yes. do not stay close to any of
them, but these largest, you run away from when you light the fuse. you
comprehend me? she briskly rolled up the long cloth. you may sell these if
you wish, or use them. remember, you must never put this close to fire. fire
will make them all explode. so many as this at once, it could destroy a house,
maybe. she hesitated over retying the cords, then added, and there is one
last thing, which you may have heard. do not cut open any of these, as some
great fools do to see what is inside. sometimes when what is inside touches
air, it will explode without the need of fire. you can lose fingers, or even a
hand.
ive heard that, mat said dryly.
she frowned at him as if wondering whether he meant to do it anyway, then
finally pushed the rolled bundle toward him. here. i must go now, before
these sons of goats awaken. glancing at the still open door, and the rain
falling in the night beyond, she sighed. perhaps i will find somewhere else
dry. i think i will go toward lugard, tomorrow. these pigs, they will expect
me to go to caemlyn, yes?
it was even further to lugard than to caemlyn, and mat suddenly
remembered that hard end of bread. and she had said she had no money. the
fireworks would buy no meals until she found someone who could afford
them. she had never even looked at the gold and silver that had spilled from
his pockets when he fell; it glittered and sparkled among the straw in the
lantern light. ah, light, i cannot let her go hungry, i suppose. he scooped up
as much as he could reach quickly.
uh . . . aludra? i have plenty, you can see. i thought perhaps. . . . he held
out the coins toward her. i can always win more.
she paused with her cloak half around her shoulders, then smiled at thom


 as she swept it the rest of the way on. he is young yet, eh?
he is young, thom agreed. and not half so bad as he would like to
think himself. sometimes he is not.
mat glowered at both of them and lowered his hand.
lifting the shafts of her cart, aludra got it turned around and started for the
door, giving tammuz a kick in the ribs as she passed. he groaned groggily.
i would like to know something, aludra, thom said. how did you light
that lantern so quickly in the dark?
stopping short of the door, she smiled over her shoulder at him. you wish
me to tell you all of my secrets? i am grateful, but i am not in love. that
secret, not even the guild knows, for it is my discovery alone. i will tell you
this much. when i know how to make it work properly, and work only when i
want it to, sticks will make my fortune for me. throwing her weight against
the shafts, she pulled the cart into the rain, and the night swallowed her.
sticks? mat said. he wondered if she might not be a little strange in the
head.
tammuz groaned again.
best we do the same as she, boy, thom said. else its a choice between
slitting four throats and maybe spending the next few days explaining
ourselves to the queens guards. these look the sort whod set them on us
out of spite. and they have enough to be spiteful for, i suppose. one of
tammuzs companions twitched as if coming to, and muttered something
incomprehensible.
by the time they had gathered everything and saddled the horses, tammuz
was up on his hands and knees with his head hanging, and the others were
stirring and groaning, too.
swinging into his saddle, mat stared at the rain outside the open door,
falling harder than ever. a bloody hero, he said. thom, if i ever look like
acting the hero again, you kick me.
and what would you have done differently?
mat scowled at him, then pulled up his hood and spread the tail of his cloak
over the fat roll tied behind the high cantle of his saddle. even with oiled
cloth, a little more protection from the rain could not hurt. just kick me! he
booted his horse in the ribs and galloped into the rainy night.


  c h a p t e r
4 1


a hunters oath


as the snow goose moved toward the long stone docks of illian, sails furled
and propelled by its sweeps, perrin stood near the stern watching great
numbers of longlegged birds wading in the tall marsh grass that all but
encircled the great harbor. he recognized the small white cranes, and could
guess at their much larger blue brothers, but many of the crested birdsredfeathered or rosy, some with flat bills broader than a duckshe did not know
at all. a dozen sorts of gulls swooped and soared above the harbor itself, and
a black bird with a long, sharp beak skimmed just above the water, its
underbeak cutting a furrow. ships three and four times as long as the snow
goose lay anchored across the expanse of the harbor, waiting their turns at the
docks, or for the tides to shift so they could sail beyond the long breakwater.
small fishing boats worked close to the marsh, and in the creeks winding
through it, two or three men in each dragging nets on long poles swung out
from either side of the boat.
the wind carried a sharp scent of salt, and did little to break the heat. the
sun stood well over halfway down to the horizon, but it seemed like noon.
the air felt damp; it was the only way he could think of it. damp. his nose
caught the smell of fresh fish from the boats, of old fish and mud from the
marsh, and the sour stink of a large tanning yard that lay on a treeless island
in the marsh grass.
captain adarra muttered something softly behind him, the tiller creaked,
and the snow goose changed its course a trifle. barefoot men at the sweeps
moved as if not wanting to make a sound. perrin did not glance at them
beyond a flicker of his eye.
he peered at the tannery, instead, watching men scrape hides stretched on


 rows of wooden frames, and other men lift hides out of huge, sunken vats
with long sticks. sometimes they stacked the hides on barrows, wheeling
them into the long, low building at the edge of the yard; sometimes the hides
went back into the vats, with an addition of liquids poured from large stone
crocks. they probably made more leather in a day than was made in emonds
field in months, and he could see another tannery on another island beyond
the first.
it was not that he had any real interest in ships or fishing boats or tanning
yards, or even very much in the birdsthough he did wonder what those pale
red ones could be fishing for with their flat bills, and some of them looked
good to eat unless he watched himselfbut anything at all was better than
watching the scene behind him on the deck of the snow goose. the axe at his
belt was no defense against that. a stone wall wouldnt be defense enough, he
thought.
moiraine had been neither pleased nor displeased to discover that zarine
ill not call her faile, whatever she wants to name herself! she is no falcon!
knew she was aes sedai, though she had been perhaps a little upset with
him for not telling her. a little upset. she called me a fool, but that was all.
then. moiraine did not seem to care one way or another about zarine being a
hunter of the horn. but once she learned the girl thought they would lead her
to the horn of valere, once she learned he had known that, too, and not told
herzarine had been more than forthcoming about both subjects with
moiraine, to his mindthen her cold dark stare had taken on a quality that
made him feel as if he had been packed in a barrel of snow in the dead of
winter. the aes sedai said nothing, but she stared too often and too hard for
any comfort.
he looked over his shoulder and quickly returned to studying the shoreline.
zarine was sitting crosslegged on the deck near the horses tethered between
the masts, her bundle and dark cloak beside her, her narrow, divided skirts
neatly arrayed, pretending to study the rooftops and towers of the oncoming
city. moiraine was studying illian, too, from just ahead of the men working
the sweeps, but now and then she shot a hard look at the girl from under the
deep hood of her fine gray wool cloak. how can she stand wearing that? his
own coat was unbuttoned and his shirt unlaced at the neck.
zarine met each aes sedai look with a smile, but every time moiraine
turned away, she swallowed and wiped her forehead.
perrin rather admired her for managing that smile when moiraine was
watching. it was a good deal more than he could do. he had never seen the


 aes sedai truly lose her temper, but he himself was at the point of wishing
she would shout, or rage, or anything but stare at him. light, maybe not
anything! maybe the stare was bearable.
lan sat further toward the bow than moirainehis colorshifting cloak was
still in the saddlebags at his feetoutwardly absorbed in examining his sword
blade, but making little effort to hide his amusement. sometimes his lips
appeared to quirk very close to a smile. perrin was not certain; at times he
thought it was only a shadow. shadows could make a hammer seem to smile.
each woman obviously thought she was the object of that amusement, but the
warder did not appear to mind the tightlipped frowns he received from both
of them.
a few days earlier perrin had heard moiraine ask lan, in a voice like ice,
whether he saw something to laugh at. i would never laugh at you, moiraine
sedai, he had replied calmly, but if you truly intend to send me to myrelle, i
must become used to smiling. i hear that myrelle tells her warders jokes.
gaidin must smile at their bond holders quips; you have often given me
quips to laugh at, have you not? perhaps you would rather i stay with you
after all. she had given him a look that would have nailed any other man to
the mast, but the warder never blinked. lan made cold steel seem like tin.
the crew had taken to padding about their work in utter silence when
moiraine and zarine were on deck together. captain adarra held his head
tilted, and looked as if he were listening for something he did not want to
hear. he passed his orders in whispers, instead of the shouts he had used at
first. everyone knew moiraine was aes sedai, now, and everyone knew she
was displeased. perrin had let himself get into one shouting match with
zarine, and he was not sure which of them had said the words aes sedai,
but the whole crew knew. bloody woman! he was uncertain whether he meant
moiraine or zarine. if she is the falcon, what is the hawk supposed to be? am
i going to be stuck with two women like her? light! no! she is not a falcon,
and that is an end to it! the only good thing he could find in all this was that
with an angry aes sedai to worry about, none of the crew looked twice at his
eyes.
loial was nowhere in sight, at the moment. the ogier stayed in his stifling
cabin whenever moiraine and zarine were topside togetherworking on his
notes, he said. he only came on deck at night, to smoke his pipe. perrin did
not see how he could take the heat; even moiraine and zarine were better than
being belowdecks.
he sighed and kept his eyes on illian. the city the ship was approaching


 was largeas big as cairhien or caemlyn, the only two great cities he had
ever seenand it reared out of a huge marsh that stretched for miles like a
plain of waving grass. illian had no walls at all, but it seemed to be all towers
and palaces. the buildings were all pale stone, except for some that appeared
covered with white plaster, but the stone was white and gray and reddish and
even faint shades of green. rooftops of tile sparkled under the sun with a
hundred different hues. the long docks held many ships, most dwarfing the
snow goose, and bustled with the loading and unloading of cargo. there were
shipyards at the far end of the city, where great ships stood in every stage
from skeletons of thick wooden ribs to nearly ready to slide into the harbor.
perhaps illian was large enough to keep wolves at bay. they surely would
not hunt in those marshes. the snow goose had outrun the wolves that had
followed him from the mountains. he reached out for them gingerly, now, and
feltnothing. a curiously empty feeling, given that it was what he wanted.
his dreams had been his ownfor the most partsince that first night.
moiraine had asked about them in a cold voice, and he had told the truth.
twice he had found himself in that odd sort of wolf dream, and both times
hopper had appeared, chasing him away, telling him he was too young yet,
too new. what moiraine made of that, he had no idea; she told him nothing,
except to say he had best be wary.
thats as well by me, he growled. he was almost becoming used to
hopper being dead but not dead, in the wolf dreams, at least. behind him, he
heard captain adarra scuff his boots on the deck and mutter something,
startled that anyone would speak aloud.
lines were hurled ashore from the ship. while they were still being made
fast to stone posts along the docks, the slightly built captain leaped into
motion, whispering fiercely to his crew. he had booms rigged to lift the
horses onto the wharf almost as quickly as the gangplank was laid in place.
lans black war horse kicked and nearly broke the boom hoisting him. loials
huge, hairyfetlocked mount needed two.
an honor, adarra whispered to moiraine with a bow as she stepped onto
the wide plank leading to the dock. an honor to have served you, aes
sedai. she strode ashore without looking at him, her face hidden in her deep
hood.
loial did not appear until everyone else was on the dock, and the horses,
too. the ogier came thumping up the gangplank trying to don his long coat
while carrying his big saddlebags and striped blanketroll, and his cloak over
one arm. i did not know we had arrived, he rumbled breathlessly. i was


 rereading my. . . . he trailed off with a glance at moiraine. she appeared to
be absorbed in watching lan saddle aldieb, but the ogiers ears flickered like
a nervous cats.
his notes, perrin thought. one of these days i have to see what he is saying
about all this. something tickled the back of his neck, and he jumped a foot
before he realized he was smelling a clean, herbal scent through the spices
and tar and stinks of the docks.
zarine wiggled her fingers, smiling at them. if i can do that with just a
brush of my fingers, farmboy, i wonder how high you would jump if i?
he was growing a little tired of considering looks from those dark, tilted
eyes. she may be pretty, but she looks at me the way id look at a tool id
never seen before, trying to puzzle out how it was made, and what it is
supposed to be used for.
zarine. moiraines voice was cool but unruffled.
i am called faile, zarine said firmly, and for a moment, with her bold
nose, she did look like a falcon.
zarine, moiraine said firmly, it is time for our ways to part. you will
find better hunting elsewhere, and safer.
i think not, zarine said just as firmly. a hunter must follow the trail she
sees, and no hunter would ignore the trail you four leave. and i am faile.
she spoiled it a bit by swallowing, but she did not blink as she met moiraines
eyes.
are you certain? moiraine said softly. are you sure you will not change
your mind . . . falcon?
i will not. there is nothing you or your stonefaced warder can do to stop
me. zarine hesitated, then added slowly, as if she had decided to be entirely
truthful, at least, there is nothing that you will do that can stop me. i know a
little of aes sedai; i know, for all the stories, that there are things you will not
do. and i do not believe stoneface would do what he must to make me give
over.
are you sure enough of that to risk it? lan spoke quietly, and his face did
not change, but zarine swallowed again.
there is no need to threaten her, lan, perrin said. he was surprised to
realize he was glaring at the warder.
moiraines glance silenced him and the warder both. you believe you


 know what an aes sedai will not do, do you? she said more softly than
before. her smile was not pleasant. if you wish to go with us, this is what
you must do. lans eyelids flickered in surprise; the two women stared at
each other like falcon and mouse, but zarine was not the falcon, now. you
will swear by your hunters oath to do as i say, to heed me, and not to leave
us. once you know more than you should of what we do, i will not allow you
to fall into the wrong hands. know that for truth, girl. you will swear to act as
one of us, and do nothing that will endanger our purpose. you will ask no
questions of where we go or why: you will be satisfied with what i choose to
tell you. all of this you will swear, or you will remain here in illian. and you
will not leave this marsh until i return to release you, if it takes the rest of
your life. that i swear.
zarine turned her head uneasily, watching moiraine out of one eye. i may
accompany you if i swear? the aes sedai nodded. i will be one of you, the
same as loial or stoneface. but i can ask no questions. are they allowed to
ask questions? moiraines face lost a little of its patience. zarine stood up
straighter and held her head high. very well, then. i swear, by the oath i took
as a hunter. if i break one, i will have broken both. i swear it!
done, moiraine said, touching the younger womans forehead; zarine
shivered. since you brought her to us, perrin, she is your responsibility.
mine! he yelped.
i am no ones responsibility but my own! zarine nearly shouted.
the aes sedai went serenely on as if they had never opened their mouths.
it seems you have found mins falcon, taveren. i have tried to discourage
her, but it appears she will perch on your shoulder whatever i do. the pattern
weaves a future for you, it seems. yet remember this. if i must, i will snip
your thread from the pattern. and if the girl endangers what must be, you will
share her fate.
i did not ask for her to come along! perrin protested. moiraine calmly
mounted aldieb, adjusting her cloak over the white mares saddle. i did not
ask for her! loial shrugged at him and silently mouthed something. no
doubt a saying about the dangers of angering aes sedai.
you are taveren? zarine said disbelievingly. her gaze ran over his sturdy
country clothes and settled on his yellow eyes. well, perhaps. whatever you
are, she threatens you as easily as she does me. who is min? what does she
mean, i will perch on your shoulder? her face tightened. if you try making
me your responsibility, i will carve your ears. do you hear me?


 grimacing, he slipped his unstrung bow under the saddle girths along
steppers flank, and climbed into the saddle. restive after days on the ship,
the dun lived up to his name until perrin calmed him with a firm hand on the
reins and pats to his neck.
none of that deserves an answer, he growled. min bloody told her! burn
you, min! burn you, too, moiraine! and zarine! he could never remember
rand or mat being bullied by women on every side. or himself, before
leaving emonds field. nynaeve had been the only one. and mistress
luhhan, of course; she ran him and master luhhan both, everywhere but in
the smithy. and egwene had had a way about her, though mostly with rand.
mistress alvere, egwenes mother, always had a smile, but things seemed to
end up being done as she wanted, too. and the womens circle had looked
over everybodys shoulder.
grumbling to himself, he reached down and took zarine by an arm; she
gave a squawk and nearly dropped her bundle as he hoisted her up behind his
saddle. those divided skirts of hers made it easy for her to straddle stepper.
moiraine will have to buy you a horse, he muttered. you cannot walk the
whole way.
you are strong, blacksmith, zarine said, rubbing her arm, but i am not a
piece of iron. she shifted around, stuffing her bundle and her cloak between
them. i can buy my own horse, if i need one. the whole way where?
lan was already riding off the dock into the city, with moiraine and loial
behind him. the ogier looked back at perrin.
no questions, remember? and my name is perrin, zarine. not big man,
or blacksmith, or anything else. perrin. perrin aybara.
and mine is faile, shaggyhair.
with something close to a snarl, he booted stepper after the others. zarine
had to throw her arms around his waist to keep from being tossed over the
duns crupper. he thought she was laughing.


 c h a p t e r
4 2


easing the badger


the hubbub of the city quickly submerged zarines laughterif that was
what it wasbeneath all the clamor that perrin remembered from caemlyn
and cairhien. the sounds were different here, slower, and pitched differently,
but they were the same, too. boots and wheels and hooves on rough, uneven
paving stones, cart and wagon axles squealing, music and song and laughter
drifting from inns and taverns. voices. a hum of voices like putting his head
into a giant beehive. a great city, living.
from down a side street he heard the clang of hammer on anvil, and shifted
his shoulders unconsciously. he missed the hammer and tongs in his hands,
the whitehot metal giving off sparks as his blows shaped it. the smithy
sounds faded behind, buried under the rumble of carts and wagons, and the
babble of shopkeepers and people in the streets. under all the smells of
people and horses, cooking and baking, and a hundred scents he had found
peculiar to cities lay the smell of marsh and salt water.
he was surprised the first time they came to a bridge inside the citya low
arch of stone over a waterway no more than thirty paces acrossbut by the
third such bridge, he realized that illian was crisscrossed by as many canals as
streets, with men poling laden barges as often as plying whips to move heavy
wagons. sedan chairs wove through the crowds in the streets, and
occasionally the lacquered coach of some wealthy merchant or a noble, with
crest or house sign painted large on the doors. many of the men wore
peculiar beards that left their upper lip bare, while the women seemed to favor
hats with wide brims and attached scarves that they wound around their
necks.
once they crossed a great square, many hides in extent, surrounded by


 huge columns of white marble at least fifteen spans tall and two spans thick,
supporting nothing but a wreath of carved olive branches at the top of each. a
huge, white palace stood at either end of the square, each all columned walks
and airy balconies, slender towers and purple roofs. each reflected the other
exactly, at first glance, but then perrin realized that one was just a fraction
smaller in each dimension, its towers perhaps less than a pace shorter.
the kings palace, zarine said against his back, and the great hall of
the council. it is said the first king of illian said the council of nine could
have any palace they wished, just as long as they did not try to build one
larger than his. so the council copied the kings palace exactly, but two feet
smaller in every measurement. that has been the way of illian ever since. the
king and the council of nine duel with each other, and the assemblage
struggles with both, and so while they carry on their battles, the people live
much as they wish, with none to look over their shoulders too much. it is not
a bad way to live, if you must be tied to one city. you would also like to
know, i think, blacksmith, that this is the square of tammaz, where i took the
hunters oath. i think i will end up teaching you so much, no one will notice
the hay in your hair.
perrin held his tongue with an effort, resolving not to stare so openly again.
no one seemed to take loial as anything much out of the ordinary. a few
people looked at him twice, and some small children scampered along in their
wake for a time, but it appeared that ogier were not unknown in illian. none
of the folk seemed to notice the heat or the damp, either.
for once, loial did not appear pleased with the peoples acceptance. his
long eyebrows drooped down on his cheeks, and his ears had wilted, though
perrin was not sure that was not just the air. his own shirt clung to him with a
mixture of sweat and the damp air.
are you afraid youll find other ogier here, loial? he asked. he felt
zarine stir against his back and cursed his tongue. he meant to let the woman
know even less than moiraine apparently meant to tell her. that way, perhaps,
she would grow bored enough to leave. if moiraine will let her go, now. burn
me, i dont want any bloody falcon perched on my shoulder, even if she is
pretty.
loial nodded. our stonemasons sometimes come here. he spoke in a
whisper not only for an ogier, but for anyone. even perrin could barely hear.
from stedding shangtai, i mean. it was masons from our stedding who built
part of illianthe palace of the assemblage, the great hall of the council,


 some of the othersand they always send to us when repairs need to be done.
perrin, if there are ogier here, they will make me go back to the stedding. i
should have thought of it before now. this place makes me uneasy, perrin.
his ears shifted nervously.
perrin moved stepper closer and reached up to pat loials shoulder. it was
a long reach, above his head. conscious of zarine at his back, he chose his
words carefully. loial, i do not believe moiraine would let them take you.
you have been with us a long time, and she seems to want you with us. she
will not let them take you, loial. why not? he wondered suddenly. she keeps
me because she thinks i may be important to rand, and maybe because she
doesnt want me telling what i know to anyone. maybe thats why she wants
him to stay.
of course, she would not, loial said in a slightly stronger voice, and his
ears perked up. i am very useful, after all. she may need to travel the ways
again, and she could not without me. zarine shifted against perrins back,
and he shook his head, trying to catch loials eye. but loial was not looking.
he seemed to have just heard what he had said, and the tufts on his ears had
fallen a little. i do hope its not that, perrin. the ogier looked at the city
around them, and his ears went all the way back down. i do not like this
place, perrin.
moiraine rode closer to lan and spoke softly, but perrin managed to catch
her words. something is wrong in this city. the warder nodded.
perrin felt an itch between his shoulders. the aes sedai had sounded grim.
first loial, and now her. what dont i see? the sun shone down on the
sparkling roof tiles, made reflections from pale stone walls. those buildings
looked as if they might be cool, inside. the buildings were clean and bright,
and so were the people. the people.
at first he saw nothing out of the ordinary. men and women moving about
their business, purposeful, but slower than he was used to further north. he
thought it might be the heat, and the bright sun. then he spotted a bakers lad
trotting down the street with a big tray of fresh loaves balanced on his head;
the young fellow wore a grimace on his face that was nearly a snarl. a woman
in front of a weavers shop looked as if she might bite the man holding up the
brightcolored bolts for her inspection. a juggler on a corner ground his teeth
and stared at the folk who tossed coins into the cap lying in front of him as if
he hated them. not everyone looked so, but it seemed to him that at least one
face in five wore anger and hatred. and he did not think they were even
aware of it.


 what is the matter? zarine asked. you are tensing. it is like holding on
to a rock.
something is wrong, he told her. i do not know what, but something is
wrong. loial nodded sadly, and murmured about how they would make him
go back.
the buildings around them began to change as they rode, crossing more
bridges as they crossed illian to its other side. the pale stone was as often
undressed as polished, now. the towers and palaces vanished, to be replaced
by inns and warehouses. many of the men in the streets, and some of the
women, had an oddly rolling gait; they all had the bare feet he associated with
sailors. the smells of pitch and hemp were strong in the air, and the scent of
wood, both freshly cut and cured, with sour mud overlying both. the canals
odors changed, too, making his nose wrinkle. chamber pots, he thought.
chamber pots and old privies. it made him feel queasy.
the bridge of flowers, lan announced as they crossed yet another low
bridge. he inhaled deeply. and now we are in the perfumed quarter. the
illianers are a poetic people.
zarine stifled a laugh against perrins back.
as if he were suddenly impatient with the slow pace of illian, the warder
led them quickly through the streets to an inn, two stories of rough, greenveined stone topped with pale green tiles. evening was coming on, the light
growing softer as the sun settled. it gave a little relief from the heat, but not
much. boys seated on mounting blocks in front of the inn hopped up to take
their horses. one blackhaired lad about ten asked loial if he were an ogier,
and when loial said he was, the boy said, i did think you did be, with a
selfsatisfied nod. he led loials big horse away, tossing the copper loial had
given him into the air and catching it.
perrin frowned up at the inn sign for a moment before following the others
in. a whitestriped badger danced on its hind legs with a man carrying what
seemed to be a silver shovel. easing the badger, it read. it must be some story
i never heard.
the common room had sawdust on the floor, and tabac smoke filled the air.
it also smelled of wine, and fish cooking in the kitchen, and a heavy, flowered
perfume. the exposed beams of the high ceiling were roughhewn and agedark. this early in the evening, no more than a quarter of the stools and
benches were filled, by men in workmens plain coats and vests, some with
the bare feet of sailors. all of them sat clustered as close as they could


 manage around one table where a pretty, darkeyed girl, the wearer of the
perfume, sang to the strumming of a twelvestring bittern and danced on the
tabletop with swirls of her skirt. her loose, white blouse had an extremely low
neck. perrin recognized the tunethe dancing lassbut the words the
girl sang were different from what he knew.
a lugard girl, she came to town, to see what she could see.
with a wink of her eye, and a smile on her lip,
she snagged a boy or three, or three.
with an ankle slim, and skin so pale,
she caught the owner of a ship, a ship.
with a soft little sigh, and a gay little laugh,
she made her way so free. so free.
she launched into another verse, and when perrin realized what she was
singing, his face grew hot. he had thought nothing could shock him after
seeing tinker girls dance, but that had only hinted at things. this girl was
singing them right out.
zarine was nodding in time to the music and grinning. her grin widened
when she looked at him. why, farmboy, i do not think i ever knew a man
your age who could still blush.
he glared at her and barely stopped himself from saying something he
knew would be stupid. this bloody woman has me jumping before i can think.
light, ill wager she thinks i never even kissed a girl! he tried not to listen to
any more of what the girl was singing. if he could not get the red out of his
face, zarine was sure to make more of it.
a flash of startlement had passed across the face of the proprietress when
they entered. a large, round woman with her hair in a thick roll at the back of
her neck and a smell of strong soap about her, she suppressed her surprise
quickly, though, and hurried to moiraine.
mistress mari, she said, i did never think to see you here today. she
hesitated, eyeing perrin and zarine, glanced once at loial, but not in the
searching way she looked at them. her eyes actually brightened at the sight of
the ogier, but her real attention was all on mistress mari. she lowered her
voice, have my pigeons no arrived safely? lan, she seemed to accept as a
part of moiraine.
i am sure they have, nieda, moiraine said. i have been away, but i am
sure adine has noted down everything you reported. she eyed the girl
singing on the table with no outward disapproval, nor any other expression.


 the badger was considerably quieter when last i was here.
aye, mistress mari, it did be that. but the louts have no gotten over the
winter yet, it does seem. i have no had a fight in the badger in ten years, till
the tail of this winter gone. she nodded toward the one man not sitting near
the singer, a fellow even bigger than perrin, standing against the wall with his
thick arms folded, tapping his foot to the music. even bili did have a hard
time keeping them down, so i did hire the girl to take their minds from anger.
from some place in altara, she does come. she tilted her head, listening for
a moment. a fair voice, but i did sing it betteraye, and dance better, too
when i did be her age.
perrin gaped at the thought of this huge woman capering on a table, singing
that songa bit of it came through; ill wear no shift at all. at alluntil
zarine fisted him hard in the short ribs. he grunted.
nieda looked his way. ill mix you some honey and sulphur, lad, for that
throat. youll no want to take a chill before the weather warms, no with a
pretty girl like that one on your arm.
moiraine gave him a look that said he was interfering with her. strange
that you should suffer fights, she said. i well remember how your nephew
stops such. has something occurred to make people more irritable?
nieda mused for a moment. perhaps. it do be hard to say. the young
lordlings do always come down to the docks for the wenching and carousing
they can no get away with where the air does smell fresher. perhaps they do
come more often, now, since the hard of the winter. perhaps. and others do
snap at each other more, too. it did be a hard winter. that does make men
angrier, and women as well. all that rain, and cold. why, i did wake two
mornings to find ice in my washbasin. no so hard as the last winter, of course,
but that did be a winter for a thousand years. almost enough to make me
believe those travelers tales of frozen water falling from the sky. she
giggled to show how little she believed that. it was an odd sound from such a
large woman.
perrin shook his head. she doesnt believe in snow? but if she thought this
weather was cool, he could believe it of her.
moiraine bent her head in thought, her hood shadowing her face.
the girl on the table was beginning a new verse, and perrin found himself
listening in spite of himself. he had never heard of any woman doing
anything remotely like what the girl was singing about, but it did sound
interesting. he noticed zarine watching him listen, and tried to pretend he had


 not been.
what has occurred out of the ordinary in illian of late? moiraine said
finally.
i do suppose you could call lord brends ascension to the council of nine
unusual, nieda said. fortune prick me, i can no remember ever hearing his
name before the winter, but he did come to the cityfrom somewhere near
the murandian border, it be rumoredand did be raised inside a week. it do
be said he be a good man, and strongest of the ninethey all do follow his
lead, it be said, though he be newest and unknownbut sometimes i do have
strange dreams of him.
moiraine had opened her mouthto tell nieda she had meant in the last
few nights, perrin was surebut she hesitated, and instead said, what sort of
strange dreams, nieda?
oh, foolishness, mistress mari. just foolishness. you do truly wish to hear
it? dreams of lord brend in strange places, and walking bridges hanging in
air. all fogged, these dreams do be, but near every night they do come. did
you ever hear of such? foolishness, fortune prick me! yet, it do be odd. bili
does say he does dream the same dreams. i do think he does hear my dreams
and copy them. bili do be none too bright, sometimes, i do think.
you may do him an injustice, moiraine breathed.
perrin stared at her dark hood. she had sounded shaken, even more shaken
than when she thought a new false dragon had risen in ghealdan. he could
not smell fear, but. . . . moiraine was frightened. it was a far more terrifying
thought than moiraine angry. he could imagine her angry; he could not begin
to conceive of her afraid.
how i do maunder on, nieda said, patting the rolled hair at the back of
her neck. as if my foolish dreams do be important. she giggled again. a
quick giggle; this was not as foolish as believing in snow. you do sound
tired, mistress mari. i will show you to your rooms. and then a good meal of
freshcaught redstripe.
redstripe? a fish, he thought it must be; he could smell fish cooking.
rooms, moiraine said. yes. we will take rooms. the meal can wait.
ships. nieda, what ships sail for tear? early on the morrow. i have that which
i must do tonight. lan glanced at her, frowning.
for tear, mistress mari? nieda laughed. why, none for tear. the nine
did forbid any ship to sail for tear a month gone now, nor any from tear to


 call here, though i do think the sea folk pay it no mind. but there do be no
sea folk ship in the harbor. it do be odd, that. the order of the nine, i do
mean, and the king silent on it, when he does always raise his voice if they
but take a step without his lead. or perhaps it be no that, exactly. all talk do
be of war with tear, but the boatmen and wagoneers who do carry supplies to
the army do say the soldiers do all look north, to murandy.
the paths of the shadow are tangled, moiraine said in a tight voice. we
will do what we must. the rooms, nieda. and then we will eat that meal.
perrins room was more comfortable than he expected, given the look of
the rest of the badger. the bed was wide, the mattress soft. the door was
made of tilted slats, and when he opened the windows, a breeze crossed the
room carrying the smells of the harbor. and something of the canals, too, but
at least it was cooling. he hung his cloak on a peg along with his quiver and
axe, and propped his bow in the corner. everything else he left in the
saddlebags and blanketroll. the night might not be restful.
if moiraine had sounded afraid before, it had been nothing to when she said
that something must be done tonight. for an instant then, fear scent had
steamed from her as from a woman announcing that she was going to stick
her hand in a hornets nest and crush them with her bare fingers. what in the
light is she up to? if moiraine is frightened, i should be terrified.
he was not, he realized. not terrified, or even frightened. he felt . . .
excited. ready for something to happen, almost eager. determined. he
recognized the feelings. they were what wolves felt just before they fought.
burn me, id rather be afraid!
he was first back down to the common except for loial. nieda had
arranged a large table for them, with ladderback chairs instead of benches.
she had even found a chair big enough for loial. the girl across the room
was singing a song about a rich merchant who, having just lost his team of
horses in an improbable way, had for some reason decided to pull his carriage
himself. the men listening around her roared with laughter. the windows
showed darkness coming on more quickly than he had expected; the air
smelled as if it might be making up to rain.
this inn has an ogier room, loial said as perrin sat down. apparently,
every inn in illian has one, in hopes of gaining ogier custom when the
stonemasons come. nieda claims it is lucky, having an ogier under the roof. i
cannot think they get many. the masons always stay together when they go
outside to work. humans are so hasty, and the elders are always afraid


 tempers will flare and someone will put a long handle on his axe. he eyed
the men around the singer as if he suspected them of it. his ears were
drooping again.
the rich merchant was in the process of losing his carriage, to more
laughter. did you find out whether any ogier from stedding shangtai are in
illian?
there were, but nieda said they left during the winter. she said they had
not finished their work. i do not understand it. the masons would not have
left work undone unless they were not paid, and nieda said it was not that.
one morning, they were just gone, though someone saw them walking down
the maredo causeway in the night. perrin, i do not like this city. i do not
know why, but it makes me . . . uneasy.
ogier, moiraine said, are sensitive to some things. she still had her
face hidden, but nieda had apparently sent someone to buy her a light cloak
of dark blue linen. the fear smell was gone from her, but her voice sounded
under tight control. lan held her chair for her; his eyes looked worried.
zarine was the last down, running her fingers through justwashed hair. the
herbal scent was stronger around her than before. she stared at the platter
nieda placed on the table and muttered under her breath. i hate fish.
the stout woman had brought all the food on a small cart with shelves; it
was dusty in places, as if it had been hastily brought out from the storeroom
in moiraines honor. the dishes were sea folk porcelain, too, if chipped.
eat, moiraine said, looking straight at zarine. remember that any meal
can be your last. you chose to travel with us, so tonight you will eat fish.
tomorrow, you may die.
perrin did not recognize the nearly round white fish with red stripes, but
they smelled good. he lifted two onto his plate with the serving fork, and
grinned at zarine around a mouthful. they tasted good, too, lightly spiced.
eat your nasty fish, falcon, he thought. he also thought that zarine looked as
if she might bite him.
do you wish me to stop the girl singing, mistress mari? nieda asked.
she was setting bowls of peas and some sort of stiff yellow mush on the table.
so you can eat in quiet?
staring at her plate, moiraine did not seem to hear.
lan listened a momentthe merchant had already lost, in succession, his
carriage, his cloak, his boots, his gold, and the rest of his clothes, and was


 now reduced to wrestling a pig for its dinnerand shook his head. she will
not bother us. he looked close to smiling for a moment, before he glanced at
moiraine. then the worry returned to his eyes.
what is wrong? zarine said. she was ignoring the fish. i know
something is. i have not see that much expression on you, stoneface, since i
met you.
no questions! moiraine said sharply. you will know what i tell you and
no more!
what will you tell me? zarine demanded.
the aes sedai smiled. eat your fish.
the meal went on in near silence after that, except for the songs drifting
across the room. there was one about a rich man whose wife and daughters
made a fool of him time and again without ever deflating his selfimportance,
another that concerned a young woman who decided to take a walk without
any clothes, and one that told of a blacksmith who managed to shoe himself
instead of the horse. zarine nearly choked laughing at that one, forgot herself
enough to take a bite of fish, and suddenly grimaced as if she had put mud in
her mouth.
i wont laugh at her, perrin told himself. however foolish she looks, ill
show her what manners are. they taste good, dont they, he said. zarine
gave him a bitter look, and moiraine a frown for interrupting her thoughts,
and that was all the talk there was.
nieda was clearing away the dishes and setting an array of cheeses on the
table when a stink of something vile lifted the hackles on the back of perrins
neck. it was a smell of something that should not be, and he had smelled it
twice before. he peered about the common room uneasily.
the girl still sang to the knot of listeners, some men were strolling across
the floor from the door, and bili still leaned on the wall tapping his foot to the
sounds of the bittern. nieda patted her rolled hair, gave the room a quick
glance, and turned to push the cart away.
he looked at his companions. loial, unsurprisingly, had pulled a book from
his coat pocket and seemed to have forgotten where he was. zarine, absently
rolling a piece of white cheese into a ball, was eyeing first perrin, then
moiraine, then him again, while trying to pretend she was not. it was lan and
moiraine he was really interested in, though. they could sense a myrddraal,
or a trolloc, or any shadowspawn, before it came closer than a few hundred


 paces, but the aes sedai was staring distantly at the table in front of her, and
the warder was cutting a chunk of yellow cheese and watching her. yet the
smell of wrongness was there, as at jarra and the edge of remen, and this
time it was not going away. it seemed to be coming from something within
the common room.
he studied the room again. bili against the wall, some men crossing the
floor, the girl singing on the table, all the laughing men sitting around her.
men crossing the floor? he frowned at them. six men with ordinary faces,
walking toward where he was sitting. very ordinary faces. he was just
starting to reinspect the men listening to the girl when suddenly it came to
him that the stink of wrongness was rolling from the six. abruptly they had
daggers in their hands, as if they had realized he had seen them.
they have knives! he roared, and threw the cheese platter at them.
the common erupted into confusion, men shouting, the singer screaming,
nieda shouting for bili, everything happening at once. lan leaped to his feet,
and a ball of fire darted from moiraines hand, and loial snatched up his chair
like a club, and zarine danced to one side, cursing. she had a knife in her
hand, too, but perrin was too busy to notice much of what anyone else did.
those men seemed to be looking straight at him, and his axe was hanging
from a peg up in his room.
seizing a chair, he ripped off a thick chair leg that ran up to make one side
of the ladderback, hurled the rest of the chair at the men, and set about him
with his long bludgeon. they were trying to reach him with their naked steel,
as if lan and the others were only obstacles in their way. it was a tight tangle
where all he could manage was to knock blades away from him, and his
wilder swings threatened lan and loial and zarine as much as any of his six
attackers. from the corner of his eye he saw moiraine standing to one side,
frustration on her face; they were all so mixed together that she could do
nothing without endangering friend as well as foe. none of the knife wielders
as much as glanced at her; she was not between them and perrin.
panting, he managed to crack one of the ordinarylooking men across the
head so hard that he heard bone splinter, and abruptly realized they were all
down. it all seemed to him to have gone on for a quarter of a hour or more,
but he saw that bili was just halting, his large hands working as he stared at
the six men sprawled dead on the floor. bili had not even had time to reach
the fight before it was done.
lan wore a face even grimmer than usual; he began searching the bodies,


 thoroughly, but with a quickness that spoke of distaste. loial still had his
chair raised to swing; he gave a start and set it down with an embarrassed
grin. moiraine was staring at perrin, and so was zarine as she retrieved her
knife from the chest of one of the dead men. that stench of wrongness was
gone, as if it had died with them.
gray men, the aes sedai said softly, and after you.
gray men? nieda laughed, both loud and nervously. why, mistress
mari, next youll say you do believe in boggles and bugbears and fetches,
and old grim riding with the black dogs in the wild hunt. some of the men
who had been listening to the songs laughed, too, though they looked as
uneasily at moiraine as at the dead men. the singer stared at moiraine, as
well, her eyes wide. perrin remembered that one ball of fire, before
everything grew too jumbled. one of the gray men had a somewhat charred
look about him, and gave off a sickly sweet burned smell.
moiraine turned from perrin to the stout woman. a man may walk in the
shadow, the aes sedai said calmly, without being shadowspawn.
oh, aye, darkfriends. nieda put her hands on generous hips and frowned
at the corpses. lan had finished his searching; he glanced at moiraine and
shook his head as if he had not really expected to find anything. more likely
thieves, though i did never hear of thieves bold enough to come right into an
inn. i did never have even one killing in the badger before. bili! clear these
out, into a canal, and put down fresh sawdust. the back way, mind. i do no
want the watch putting their long noses into the badger. bili nodded as if
eager to be useful after failing to take a hand earlier. he grabbed a dead man
by the belt in either hand and carried them back toward the kitchen.
aes sedai? the darkeyed singer said. i did not mean to offend with my
common songs. she was covering the exposed part of her bosom, which was
most of it, with her hands. i can sing others, if you would so like.
sing whatever you wish, girl, moiraine told her. the white tower is not
so isolated from the world as you seem to think, and i have heard rougher
songs than you would sing. even so, she did not look pleased that the
common now knew she was aes sedai. she glanced at lan, gathered the linen
cloak around her, and started for the door.
the warder moved quickly to intercept her, and they spoke quietly in front
of the door, but perrin could hear as well as if they whispered right next to
him.
do you mean to go without me? lan said. i pledged to keep you whole,


 moiraine, when i took your bond.
you have always known there were some dangers you are not equipped to
handle, my gaidin. i must go alone.
moiraine
she cut him off. heed me, lan. should i fail, you will know it, and you
will be compelled to return to the white tower. i would not change that even
if i had time. i do not mean you to die in a vain attempt to avenge me. take
perrin with you. it seems the shadow has made his importance in the pattern
known to me, if not clear. i was a fool. rand is so strongly taveren that i
ignored what it must mean that he had two others close by him. with perrin
and mat, the amyrlin may still be able to affect the course of events. with
rand loose, she will have to. tell her what has happened, my gaidin.
you speak as if you are already dead, lan said roughly.
the wheel weaves as the wheel wills, and the shadow darkens the world.
heed me, lan, and obey, as you swore to. with that, she was gone.


 c h a p t e r
4 3


shadowbrothers


the darkeyed girl climbed back on her table and started singing again, in an
unsteady voice. the tune was one perrin knew as mistress aynoras
rooster, and though the words were different once more, to his
disappointmentand embarrassment that he was disappointedit actually
was about a rooster. mistress luhhan herself would not have disapproved.
light, im getting as bad as mat.
none of the listeners complained; some of the men did look a bit
disgruntled, but they seemed to be as anxious about what moiraine might
approve as the singer was. no one wished to offend an aes sedai, even with
her gone. bili came back and hoisted two more gray men; a few of the men
listening to the song glanced at the corpses and shook their heads. one of
them spat on the sawdust.
lan came to stand in front of perrin. how did you know them,
blacksmith? he asked quietly. their taint of evil is not strong enough for
moiraine or me to sense. gray men have walked past a hundred guards
without being noticed, and warders among them.
very conscious of zarines eyes on him, perrin tried to make his voice even
softer than lans. i . . . i smelled them. ive smelled them before, at jarra and
at remen, but it always vanished. they were gone before we got there, both
times. he was not sure whether zarine had overheard or not; she was leaning
forward trying to listen, and trying to appear not to at the same time.
following rand, then. following you, now, blacksmith. the warder gave
no visible sign of surprise. he raised his voice to a more normal level. i am
going to look around outside, blacksmith. your eyes might see something i


 miss. perrin nodded; it was a measure of the warders worry that he asked
for help. ogier, your folk see better than most, too.
oh, ah, loial said. well, i suppose i could take a look, too. his big,
round eyes rolled sideways toward the two gray men still on the floor. i
would not think any more of them were out there. would you?
what are we looking for, stoneface? zarine said.
lan eyed her a moment, then shook his head as if he had decided not to say
something. whatever we find, girl. i will know it when i see it.
perrin thought about going upstairs for his axe, but the warder made for the
door, and he was not wearing his sword. he hardly needs it, perrin thought
grumpily. he is almost as dangerous without it as with. he held on to the
chair leg as he followed. it was a relief to see that zarine still had her knife in
her hand.
thick black clouds were roiling overhead. the street was as dark as late
twilight, and empty of people who had apparently not waited to be caught in
the rain. one fellow was running across a bridge down the street; he was the
only person perrin saw in any direction. the wind was picking up, blowing a
rag along the uneven paving stones; another, caught under the edge of one of
the mounting blocks, flapped with a small snapping sound. thunder grumbled
and rolled.
perrin wrinkled his nose. there was a smell of fireworks on that wind. no,
not fireworks, exactly. it was a burned sulphur sort of smell. almost.
zarine tapped the chair leg in his hands with her knife blade. you really
are strong, big man. you tore that chair apart as if it were made of twigs.
perrin grunted. he realized he was standing straighter, and deliberately
made himself slouch. fool girl! zarine laughed softly, and suddenly he did
not know whether to straighten or stay as he was. fool! this time he meant it
for himself. youre supposed to be looking. for what? he did not see
anything but the street, did not smell anything but the almost burned sulphur
scent. and zarine, of course.
loial appeared to be wondering what it was he was looking for, too. he
scratched a tufted ear, peered one way down the street, then the other, then
scratched the other ear. then he stared up at the roof of the inn.
lan appeared from the alleyway beside the inn and moved out into the
street, eyes studying the darker shadows along the buildings.


 maybe he missed seeing something, perrin muttered, though he found it
hard to believe, and turned toward the alley. i am supposed to be looking, so
ill look. maybe he did miss something.
lan had stopped a little way down the street, staring at the paving stones in
front of his feet. the warder started back toward the inn, walking quickly, but
peering at the street ahead of him as if following something. whatever it was
led straight to one of the mounting blocks, almost beside the inn door. he
stopped there, staring at the top of the gray stone block.
perrin decided to abandon going down the alleyit stank as much as the
canals in this part of illian, for one thingand walked over to lan, instead.
he saw what the warder was staring at right away. pressed into the top of the
stone mounting block were two prints, as if a huge hound had rested its
forepaws there. the smell that was almost burned sulphur was strongest here.
dogs dont make footprints in stone. light, they dont! he could make out the
trail lan had followed, too. the hound had trotted up the street as far as the
mounting block, then turned and gone back the way it had come. leaving
tracks in the stone as if they had been a plowed field. they just dont!
darkhound, lan said, and zarine gasped. loial moaned softly. for an
ogier. a darkhound leaves no mark on dirt, blacksmith, not even on mud,
but stone is another matter. there hasnt been a darkhound seen south of the
mountains of dhoom since the trolloc wars. this one was hunting for
something, id say. and now that it has found it, it has gone to tell its master.
me? perrin thought. gray men and darkhounds hunting me? this is crazy!
are you telling me nieda was right? zarine demanded in a shaky voice.
old grim is really riding with the wild hunt? light! i always thought it was
just a story.
dont be a complete fool, girl, lan said harshly. if the dark one were
free, wed all be worse than dead by now. he peered off down the street, the
way the tracks went. but darkhounds are real enough. almost as dangerous
as myrddraal, and harder to kill.
now you bring fetches into it, zarine muttered. gray men. fetches.
darkhounds. you had better lead me to the horn of valere, farmboy. what
other surprises do you have waiting for me?
no questions, lan told her. you still know little enough that moiraine
will release you from your oath, if you swear not to follow. ill take that oath
myself, and you can go now. you would be wise to give it.


 you will not frighten me away, stoneface, zarine said. i do not frighten
easily. but she sounded frightened. and smelled it, too.
i have a question, perrin said, and i want an answer. you didnt sense
this darkhound, lan, and neither did moiraine. why not?
the warder was silent for a time. the answer to that, blacksmith, he said
grimly at last, may be more than you or i, either one, want to know. i hope
the answer does not kill us all. you three get what sleep you can. i doubt we
will stay the night in illian, and i fear we have hard riding ahead.
what are you going to do? perrin asked.
i am going after moiraine. to tell her about the darkhound. she cant be
angry with me for following for that, not when she would not know it was
there until it took her throat.
the first big drops of rain splatted on the paving stones as they went back
inside. bili had removed the last of the dead gray men and was sweeping up
the sawdust where they had bled. the darkeyed girl was singing a sad song
about a boy leaving his love. mistress luhhan would have enjoyed it greatly.
lan ran ahead of them, across the common room and up the stairs, and by
the time perrin reached the second floor, the warder was already starting back
down, buckling his sword belt on, colorshifting cloak hanging over his arm
as if he hardly cared who saw it.
if he is wearing that in a city. . . . loials shaggy hair almost brushed the
ceiling as he shook his head. i do not know if i can sleep, but i will try.
dreams will be more pleasant than staying awake.
not always, loial, perrin thought as the ogier went on down the hall.
zarine seemed to want to stay with him, but he told her to go to sleep and
firmly shut the slatted door in her face. he stared at his own bed reluctantly as
he stripped down to his underbreeches.
i have to find out, he sighed, and crawled onto the bed. rain drummed
down outside, and thunder boomed. the breeze across his bed carried some of
the rains coolness, but he did not think he would need any of the blankets at
the foot of the mattress. his last thought before sleep claimed him was that he
had forgotten to light a candle again, though the room was dark. careless.
mustnt be careless. carelessness ruins the work.
dreams tumbled through his head. darkhounds chasing him; he never saw


 them, but he could hear their howling. fades, and gray men. a tall, slender
man flashed into them again and again, in richly embroidered coat and boots
with gold fringe; most of the time he held what seemed to be a sword, shining
like the sun, and laughed triumphantly. sometimes the man sat on a throne,
and kings and queens groveled before him. these felt strange, as if they were
not really his dreams at all.
then the dreams changed, and he knew he was in the wolf dream he
sought. this time he had hoped for it.
he stood atop a high, flattopped stone spire, the wind ruffling his hair,
bringing a thousand dry scents and a faint hint of water hidden in the far
distance. for an instant he thought he had the form of a wolf, and fumbled at
his own body to make sure what he saw was really him. he wore his own coat
and breeches and boots; he held his bow, and his quiver hung at his side. the
axe was not there.
hopper! hopper, where are you? the wolf did not come.
rugged mountains surrounded him, and other tall spires separated by arid
flats and jumbled ridges, and sometimes a large plateau rising with sheer
sides. things grew, but nothing lush. tough, short grass. bushes wiry and
covered with thorn, and other things that even seemed to have thorns on their
fat leaves. scattered, stunted trees, twisted by the wind. yet wolves could find
hunting even in this land.
as he peered at this rough land, a circle of darkness suddenly blanked out a
part of the mountains; he could not have said whether the darkness was right
in front of his face or halfway to the mountains, but he seemed to be seeing
through it, and beyond. mat, rattling a dice cup. his opponent stared at mat
with eyes of fire. mat did not seem to see the man, but perrin knew him.
mat! he shouted. its baalzamon! light, mat, youre dicing with
baalzamon!
mat made his toss, and as the dice spun, the vision faded, and the dark
place was dry mountains again.
hopper! perrin turned slowly, looking in every direction. he even looked
up in the skyhe can fly, nowwhere clouds promised a rain the ground far
below the spire top would drink up as soon as it fell. hopper!
a darkness formed among the clouds, a hole into somewhere else. egwene
and nynaeve and elayne stood looking at a huge metal cage, with a raised
door held on a heavy spring. they stepped in and reached up together to loose


 the catch. the barred door snapped down behind them. a woman with her
hair all in braids laughed at them, and another woman all in white laughed at
her. the hole in the sky closed, and there were only clouds.
hopper, where are you? he called. i need you! hopper!
and the grizzled wolf was there, alighting on the spire top as if he had
leaped from somewhere higher.
dangerous. you have been warned, young bull. too young. too new yet.
i need to know, hopper. you said there were things i must see. i need to
see more, know more. he hesitated, thinking of mat, of egwene and
nynaeve and elayne. the strange things i see here. are they real? hoppers
sending seemed slow, as if it were so simple the wolf could not understand the
need to explain it, or how to. finally, though, something came.
what is real is not real. what is not real is real. flesh is a dream, and
dreams have flesh.
that doesnt tell me anything, hopper. i do not understand. the wolf
looked at him, as if he had said he did not understand that water was wet.
you said i had to see something, and you showed me baalzamon, and
lanfear.
heartfang. moonhunter.
why did you show me, hopper? why did i have to see them?
the last hunt comes. sadness filled the sending, and a sense of
inevitability. what will be must be.
i do not understand! the last hunt? what last hunt? hopper, gray men
came to kill me tonight.
the notdead hunt you?
yes! gray men! after me! and a darkhound was right outside the inn! i
want to know why theyre after me.
shadowbrothers! hopper crouched, looking to either side as if he almost
expected an attack. long since we have seen the shadowbrothers. you must
go, young bull. great danger! flee the shadowbrothers!
why are they after me, hopper? you do know. i know you do!
flee, young bull. hopper leaped, forepaws hitting perrins chest, knocking
him back, over the edge. flee the shadowbrothers.


 the wind rushed in his ears as he fell. hopper and the edge of the spire top
dwindled above him. why, hopper? he shouted. i have to know why!
the last hunt comes.
he was going to hit. he knew it. the ground below rushed up at him, and
he tensed against the crushing impact that. . . .
he started awake, staring at the candle flickering on the small table beside the
bed. lightning flashes lit the window, and thunder rattled it. what did he
mean, the last hunt? he mumbled. i did not light any candle.
you talk to yourself. and thrash in your sleep.
he jumped, and cursed himself for not having noticed the herbal scent in
the air. zarine sat on a stool at the edge of the candlelight, elbow on her knee,
chin on her fist, watching him.
you are taveren, she said as if ticking off a point. stoneface thinks
those odd eyes of yours can see things his cant. gray men want to kill you.
you travel with an aes sedai, a warder, and an ogier. you free caged aiel
and kill whitecloaks. who are you, farmboy, the dragon reborn? her voice
said that was the most ridiculous thing she could think of, but he still shifted
uneasily. whoever you are, big man, she added, you could do with a little
more hair on your chest.
he twisted around, cursing, and scrabbled one of the blankets over him to
his neck. light, she keeps making me jump like a frog on a hot rock. zarines
face was at the edge of shadows. he could not see her clearly except when
lightning shone through the window, the harsh illumination casting its own
shadows across her strong nose and high cheekbones. suddenly he
remembered min saying he should run from a beautiful woman. once he had
recognized lanfear in that wolf dream, he had thought min must mean her
he did not think it was possible for a woman to be any more beautiful than
lanfearbut she was just in a dream. zarine was sitting there staring at him
with those dark, tilted eyes, considering, weighing.
what are you doing here? he demanded. what do you want? who are
you?
she threw back her head and laughed. i am faile, farmboy, a hunter of the
horn. who do you think i am, the woman of your dreams? why did you jump
that way? you would think i had goosed you.


 before he could find words, the door crashed back against the wall, and
moiraine stood in the doorway, her face as pale and grim as death. your wolf
dreams tell as truly as a dreamers, perrin. the forsaken are loose, and one
of them rules in illian.


 c h a p t e r
4 4


hunted


perrin climbed off the bed and started dressing, not caring whether zarine
was watching or not. he knew what he intended to do, but he asked moiraine
anyway. do we leave?
unless you want to make closer acquaintance with sammael, she said
dryly. thunder crashed overhead as if to punctuate her sentence, and lightning
flashed. the aes sedai barely glanced at zarine.
stuffing his shirttail into his breeches, he suddenly wished he had his coat
and cloak on. naming which one of the forsaken it was made the room seem
cold. baalzamon isnt bad enough; we have to have the forsaken loose, too.
light, does it even matter if we find rand, now? is it too late? but he kept
dressing, stamping his feet into his boots. it was that or give up, and two
rivers folk were not known for giving up.
sammael? zarine said faintly. one of the forsaken rules . . . ? light!
do you still wish to follow? moiraine said softly. i would not make you
stay here, not now, but i will give you one last chance to swear to go another
way than i.
zarine hesitated, and perrin paused with his coat half on. surely no one
would choose to go with people who had incurred the wrath of one of the
forsaken. not now that she knew something of what they faced. not unless
she has a very good reason. for that matter, anyone who heard one of the
forsaken was loose should already be running for a sea folk ship and asking
passage to the other side of the aiel waste, not sitting there thinking.
no, zarine said finally, and he began to relax. no, i will not swear to go


 another way. whether you lead me to the horn of valere or not, not even
whoever does find the horn will have a story such as this. i think this story
will be told for the ages, aes sedai, and i will be part of it.
no! perrin snapped. that is not good enough. what do you want?
i have no time for this bickering, moiraine broke in. any moment lord
brend may learn that one of his darkhounds is dead. you can be sure he will
know that means a warder, and he will come looking for the gaidins aes
sedai. do you mean to sit here until he discovers where you are? move, you
foolish children! move! she vanished down the hall before he could open his
mouth.
zarine did not wait, either, running from the room without her candle.
perrin hastily gathered his things and dashed for the back stairs still buckling
his axe belt around his waist. he caught up to loial going down, the ogier
trying to stuff a woodbound book into his saddlebags and put on his cloak at
the same time. perrin gave him a hand with the cloak while they both ran
down the stairs, and zarine caught the pair of them before they could dash out
into the pouring rain.
perrin hunched his shoulders against the wet and ran for the stable across
the stormdarkened yard without waiting to pull up the hood of his cloak. she
has to have a reason. being in a bloody story isnt reason enough for any but
a madwoman! the rain soaked his shaggy curls, laying them flat around his
head, before he darted through the stable door.
moiraine was there before them, in an oiled cloak still beaded with rain,
and nieda holding a lantern for lan to finish saddling the horses. there was
an extra, a bay gelding with an even stronger nose than zarines.
i will send pigeons every day, the stout woman was saying. no one will
suspect me. fortune prick me! even whitecloaks do speak well of me.
listen to me, woman! moiraine snapped. this is not a whitecloak or a
darkfriend i speak of. you will flee this city, and make anyone you care for
flee with you. for a dozen years you have obeyed me. obey me now! nieda
nodded, but reluctantly, and moiraine growled with exasperation.
the bay is yours, girl, lan said to zarine. get on his back. if you do not
know how to ride, you must learn by doing, or take my offer.
putting one hand on the high pommel, she vaulted easily into the saddle. i
was on a horse once, stoneface, now that i think of it. she twisted around to
tie her bundle behind her.


 what did you mean, moiraine? perrin demanded as he tossed his
saddlebag across steppers back. you said he would find out where i am. he
knows. the gray men! nieda giggled, and he wondered irritably how much
she really knew or believed among the things she said she did not believe in.
sammael did not send the gray men. moiraine mounted aldieb with a
cool, straightbacked precision, almost as if there were no hurry. the
darkhound was his, however. i believe it followed my trail. he would not
have sent both. someone wants you, but i do not think sammael even knows
you exist. yet. perrin stopped with one foot in the stirrup, staring at her, but
she seemed more concerned with patting her mares arching neck than with
the questions on his face.
as well i went after you, lan said, and the aes sedai sniffed loudly.
i could wish you were a woman, gaidin. i would send you to the tower as
a novice to learn to obey! he raised an eyebrow and touched the hilt of his
sword, then swung into his saddle, and she sighed. perhaps it is as well you
are disobedient. sometimes it is well. besides, i do not think sheriam and
siuan sanche together could teach you obedience.
i do not understand, perrin said. i seem to be saying that a great deal,
and im tired of it. i want some answers i can understand. he pulled himself
the rest of the way up so moiraine would not be looking down at him; she had
enough advantage without that. if he did not send the gray men, who did? if
a myrddraal, or another forsaken. . . . he stopped to swallow. another
forsaken! light! if somebody else sent them, why did they not tell him?
theyre all darkfriends, arent they? and why me, moiraine? why me? rand
is the bloody dragon reborn!
he heard the gasps from zarine and nieda, and only then realized what he
had said. moiraines stare seemed to skin him like the sharpest steel. hasty
bloody tongue. when did i stop thinking before i speak? it seemed to him it
had happened when he first felt zarines eyes watching him. she was
watching him now, with her mouth hanging open.
you are sealed to us, now, moiraine told the boldfaced woman. there
is no turning back for you. ever. zarine looked as if she wanted to say
something and was afraid to, but the aes sedai had already turned her
attention elsewhere. nieda, flee illian tonight. in this hour! and hold your
tongue even better than you have held it all these years. there are those who
would cut it out for what you could say, before i could even find you. her
hard tone left doubts as to exactly how she meant that, and nieda nodded


 vigorously as if she had heard it both ways.
as for you, perrin. the white mare moved closer, and he leaned back
from the aes sedai despite all he could do. there are many threads woven in
the pattern, and some are as black as the shadow itself. take care one of them
does not strangle you. her heels touched aldiebs flanks, and the mare
darted into the rain, mandarb following close behind.
burn you, moiraine, perrin thought as he rode after them. sometimes i do
not know which side you are on. he glanced at zarine, riding beside him as if
she had been born in a saddle. and whose side are you on?
rain kept people off the streets and canals, so no visible eyes watched them
go, but it made the footing uncertain for the horses on the uneven paving
stones. by the time they reached the maredo causeway, a wide road of
packed dirt stretching north through the marsh, the downpour had begun to
slacken. thunder still boomed, but the lightning flashed far behind them,
perhaps out to sea.
perrin felt a bit of luck was coming their way. the rain had stayed long
enough to hide their departure, but now it seemed they would have a clear
night for riding. he said as much, but lan shook his head.
darkhounds like clear, moonlit nights best, blacksmith, rain the least. a
good thunderstorm can keep them away completely. as if his words had
bidden it, the rain faded to a faint drizzle. perrin heard loial groan behind
him.
causeway and marsh ended together, some two miles or so from the city,
but the road kept on, slowly bearing a little eastward. clouddark evening
faded into night, and the misting rain continued. moiraine and lan kept a
steady, groundeating pace. the horses hooves splashed through puddles on
the hardpacked dirt. the moon shone through gaps in the clouds. low hills
began to rise around them, and trees to appear more and more often. perrin
thought there must be forest ahead, but he was not sure how he liked the idea.
woods could hide them from pursuit; woods could let pursuit come close
before they saw.
a thin howl rose far behind them. for a moment he thought it was a wolf;
he surprised himself by nearly reaching out to the wolf before he could stop.
the cry came again, and he knew it was no wolf. others answered it, all miles
behind, eerie wails holding blood and death, cries that spoke of nightmares.
to his surprise, lan and moiraine slowed, the aes sedai studying the hills
around them in the night.


 they are a long way, he said. theyll not catch us if we keep on.
the darkhounds? zarine muttered. those are the darkhounds? are you
sure it isnt the wild hunt, aes sedai?
but it is, moiraine replied. it is.
you can never outrun the darkhounds, blacksmith, lan said, not on the
fastest horse. always, you must face them and defeat them, or they will pull
you down.
i could have stayed in the stedding, you know, loial said. my mother
would have had me married by now, but it would not have been a bad life.
plenty of books. i did not have to come outside.
there, moiraine said, pointing to a tall, treeless mound well off to their
right. there were no trees that perrin could see for two hundred paces or more
around it, either, and they were still sparse beyond that. we must see them
coming to have a chance.
the darkhounds dire cries rose again, closer, yet still far.
lan quickened mandarbs pace a little, now that moiraine had chosen their
ground. as they climbed, the horses hooves clattered on rocks halfburied in
the dirt and slicked by the drizzle. to perrins eyes, most of them had too
many squared corners to be natural. at the top, they dismounted around what
seemed to be a low, rounded boulder. the moon appeared through a gap in the
clouds, and he found himself looking at a weathered stone face two paces
long. a womans face, he thought from the length of the hair. the rain made
her seem to be weeping.
moiraine dismounted and stood looking off in the direction of the howls.
she was a shadowed, hooded shape, rain catching moonlight as it rolled down
her oiled cloak.
loial led his horse over to peer at the carving, then bent closer and felt the
features. i think she was an ogier, he said at last. but this is not an old
stedding; i would feel it. we all would. and we would be safe from
shadowspawn.
what are you two staring at? zarine squinted at the rock. what is it?
her? who?
many nations have risen and fallen since the breaking, moiraine said
without turning, some leaving no more than names on a yellowed page, or
lines on a tattered map. will we leave as much behind? the blooddrenched


 howls rose again, still closer. perrin tried to calculate their pace, and thought
lan had been right; the horses could not have outrun them, after all. they
would not have long to wait.
ogier, lan said, you and the girl hold the horses. zarine protested, but
he rode straight over to her. your knives will not do much good here, girl.
his sword blade gleamed in the moonlight as he drew it. even this is a last
resort. it sounds like ten out there, not one. your work is to keep the horses
from running when they smell the darkhounds. even mandarb does not like
that smell.
if the warders sword was no good, then neither was the axe. perrin felt
something near to relief at that, even if they were shadowspawn; he would
not have to use the axe. he drew the length of his unstrung bow from under
steppers saddle girths. maybe this will do some good.
try if you wish, blacksmith, lan said. they do not die easily. perhaps
you will kill one.
perrin drew a fresh bowstring from his pouch, trying to shield it from the
soft rain. the beeswax coating was thin, and not much protection against
prolonged damp. setting the bow slantwise between his legs, he bent it easily,
fixing the loops of the bowstring into the horn nocks at the ends of the bow.
when he straightened, he could see the darkhounds.
they ran like horses at a gallop, and as he caught sight of them, they
gathered speed. they were only ten large shapes running in the night,
sweeping through the scattered trees, yet he pulled a broadhead arrow from
his quiver, nocked it but did not draw. he had been far from the best bowman
in emonds field, but among the younger men, only rand had been better.
at three hundred paces he would shoot, he decided. fool! youd have a
hard time hitting a target standing still at that distance. but if i wait, the way
they are moving. . . . stepping up beside moiraine, he raised his bowi just
have to imagine that moving shadow is a big dogdrew the goosefeather
fletchings to his ear, and loosed. he was sure the shaft merged with the
nearest shadow, but the only result was a snarl. it is not going to work.
theyre coming too fast! he was already drawing another arrow. why arent
you doing something, moiraine? he could see their eyes, shining like silver,
their teeth gleaming like burnished steel. black as the night itself and as big as
small ponies, they sped toward him, silent now, seeking the kill. the wind
carried a stink near to burned sulphur; the horses whickered fearfully, even
lans warhorse. burn you, aes sedai, do something! he loosed again; the


 frontmost darkhound faltered and came on. they can die! he shot once more,
and the lead darkhound tumbled, staggered to its feet, then fell, yet even as it
did he knew a moment of despair. one down, and the other nine had covered
two thirds of the distance already; they seemed to be running even faster, like
shadows flowing across the ground. one more arrow. time for one more,
maybe, and then its the axe. burn you, aes sedai! he drew again.
now, moiraine said as his arrow left the bow. the air between her hands
caught fire and streaked toward the darkhounds, vanquishing night. the
horses squealed and leaped against being held.
perrin threw an arm across his eyes to shield them from a whitehot glare
like burning, heat like a forge cracking open; sudden noon flared in the
darkness, and was gone. when he uncovered his eyes, spots flickered across
his vision, and the faint, fading image of that line of fire. where the
darkhounds had been was nothing but nightcovered ground and the soft rain;
the only shadows that moved were cast by clouds crossing the moon.
i thought shed throw fire at them, or call lightning, but this. . . . what was
that? he asked hoarsely.
moiraine was peering off toward illian again, as if she could see through all
those miles of darkness. perhaps he did not see, she said, almost to herself.
it is far, and if he was not watching, perhaps he did not notice.
who? zarine demanded. sammael? her voice shook a little. you said
he was in illian. how could he see anything here? what did you do?
something forbidden, moiraine said coolly. forbidden by vows almost
as strong as the three oaths. she took aldiebs reins from the girl, and
patted the mares neck, calming her. something not used in nearly two
thousand years. something i might be stilled just for knowing.
perhaps . . . ? loials voice was a faint boom. perhaps we should be
going? there could be more.
i think not, the aes sedai said, mounting. he would not loose two packs
at once, even if he has two; they would turn on each other instead of their
prey. and i think we are not his main quarry, or he would have come himself.
we were . . . an annoyance, i thinkher tone was calm, but it was clear she
did not like being regarded so lightlyand perhaps a little something extra
to slip into his gamebag, if we were not too much trouble. still, there is small
good in remaining any nearer him than we must.
rand? perrin asked. he could almost feel zarine leaning forward to


 listen. if we are not what he hunts, is it rand?
perhaps, moiraine said. or perhaps mat. remember that he is taveren
also, and he blew the horn of valere.
zarine made a strangled sound. he blew it? someone has found it
already?
the aes sedai ignored her, leaning out of her saddle to stare closely into
perrins eyes, dark gleaming into burnished gold. once again events outpace
me. i do not like that. and neither should you. if events outrun me, they may
well trample you, and the rest of the world with you.
we have many leagues to tear yet, lan said. the ogiers suggestion is a
good one. he was already in his saddle.
after a moment moiraine straightened and touched the mares ribs with her
heels. she was halfway down the side of the mound before he could get his
bow unstrung and take steppers reins from loial. burn you, moiraine! ill
find some answers somewhere!
leaning back against a fallen log, mat enjoyed the warmth of the campfire
the rains had drifted south three days earlier, but he still felt dampyet right
at that moment, he was hardly aware of the dancing flames. he peered
thoughtfully at the small, waxcovered cylinder in his hand. thom was
engrossed in tuning his harp, muttering to himself of rain and wet, never
glancing mats way. crickets chirped in the dark thicket around them. caught
between villages by sunset, they had chosen this copse away from the road.
two nights they had tried to buy a room for the night; twice a farmer had
loosed his dogs on them.
mat unsheathed his belt knife, and hesitated. luck. it only explodes
sometimes, she said. luck. as carefully as he could, he slit along the length of
the tube. it was a tube, and of paper, as he had thoughthe had found bits of
paper on the ground after fireworks were set off, back homelayers of paper,
but all that filled the inside was something that looked like dirt, or maybe tiny
grayblack pebbles and dust. he stirred them on his palm with one finger.
how in the light could pebbles explode?
the light burn me! thom roared. he thrust his harp into its case as if to
protect it from what was in mats hand. are you trying to kill us, boy?
havent you ever heard those things explode ten times as hard for air as for
fire? fireworks are the next thing to aes sedai work, boy.


 maybe, mat said, but aludra did not look like any aes sedai to me. i
used to think that about master alveres clockthat it had to be aes sedai
workbut once i got the back of the cabinet open, i saw it was full of little
pieces of metal. he shifted uncomfortably at the memory. mistress alvere
had been the first to reach him that time, with the wisdom and his father and
the mayor all right behind her, and none believing he just meant to look. i
could have put them all back together. i think perrin could make one, if he
saw those little wheels and springs and i dont know what all.
you would be surprised, boy, thom said dryly. even a bad clockmaker
is a fairly rich man, and they earn it. but a clock does not explode in your
face!
neither did this. well, it is useless, now. he tossed the handful of paper
and little pebbles into the fire to a screech from thom; the pebbles sparked
and made tiny flashes, and there was a smell of acrid smoke.
you are trying to kill us. thoms voice was unsteady, and it rose in
intensity and pitch as he spoke. if i decide i want to die, i will go to the
royal palace when we reach caemlyn, and ill pinch morgase! his long
mustaches flailed. do not do that again!
it did not explode, mat said, frowning at the fire. he fished into the
oiledcloth roll on the other side of the log and pulled out a firework of the
next larger size. i wonder why there was no bang.
i do not care why there was no bang! do not do it again!
mat glanced at him and laughed. stop shaking, thom. theres no need to
be afraid. i know what is inside them, now. at least, i know what it looks like,
but. . . . dont say it. i will not be cutting any more open, thom. it is more
fun to set them off, anyway.
i am not afraid, you mudfooted swineherd, thom said with elaborate
dignity. i am shaking with rage because im traveling with a goatbrained
lout who might kill the pair of us because he cannot think past his own
ho, the fire!
mat exchanged glances with thom as horses hooves approached. it was
late for anyone honest to be traveling. but the queens guards kept the roads
safe this close to caemlyn, and the four who rode into the firelight certainly
did not look like robbers. one was a woman. the men all wore long cloaks
and seemed to be her retainers, while she was pretty and blueeyed, in gold
necklace and a gray silk dress and a velvet cloak with a wide hood. the men


 dismounted. one held her reins and another her stirrup, and she smiled at
mat, doffing her gloves as she came near the fire.
i fear we are caught out late, young master, she said, and i would
trouble you for directions to an inn, if you know one.
he grinned and started to rise. he had made it as far as a crouch when he
heard one of the men mutter something, and another produced a crossbow
from under his cloak, already drawn, with a clip holding the bolt.
kill him, fool! the woman shouted, and mat tossed the firework into the
flames and threw himself toward his quarterstaff. there was a loud bang and a
flash of lightaes sedai! a man cried. fireworks, fool! the woman
shoutedand he rolled to his feet with the staff in his hand to see the
crossbow bolt sticking out of the fallen log almost where he had been sitting,
and the crossbowman falling with the hilt of one of thoms knives adorning
his chest.
it was all he had time to see, for the other two men darted past the fire at
him, drawing swords. one of them suddenly stumbled to his knees, dropping
his sword to claw at the knife in his back as he fell facedown. the last man
did not see his companion fall; he obviously expected to be one of a pair,
dividing their opponents attention, as he thrust his blade at mats middle.
feeling almost contemptuous, mat cracked the fellows wrist with one end of
his staff, sending the sword flying, and cracked his forehead with the other.
the mans eyes rolled up in his head as he collapsed.
from the corner of his eye, mat saw the woman walking toward him, and
he stuck a finger at her like a knife. fine clothes you wear for a thief,
woman! you sit down till i decide what to do with you, or ill
she looked as surprised as mat at the knife that suddenly bloomed in her
throat, a red flower of spreading blood. he took a half step as if to catch her
as she fell, knowing it was no good. her long cloak settled over her, covering
everything but her face, and the hilt of thoms knife.
burn you, mat muttered. burn you, thom merrilin! a woman! light,
we could have tied her up, given her to the queens guards tomorrow in
caemlyn. light, i might even have let her go. shed rob nobody without these
three, and the only one that lives will be days before he can see straight and
months before he can hold a sword. burn you, thom, there was no need to
kill her!
the gleeman limped to where the woman lay, and kicked back her cloak.
the dagger had half fallen from her hand, its blade as wide as mats thumb


 and two hands long. would you rather i had waited till she nested that in
your ribs, boy? he retrieved his own knife, wiping the blade on her cloak.
mat realized he was humming she wore a mask that hid her face, and
stopped it. he bent down and hid hers with the hood of her cloak. best we
move on, he said quietly. i do not want to have to explain this if a patrol of
the guards happens by.
with her in those clothes? thom said. i should say not! they must have
robbed a merchants wife, or some noblewomans carriage. his voice
became gentler. if were going, boy, you had best see to saddling your
horse.
mat gave a start and pulled his eyes from the dead woman. yes, i had
better, hadnt i? he did not look at her again.
he had no such compunction about the men. as far as he was concerned, a
man who decided to rob and kill deserved what he got when he lost the game.
he did not dwell on them, but neither did he jerk his eyes away if they fell on
one of the robbers. it was after he had saddled his gelding and tied his things
on behind, while he was kicking dirt onto the fire, that he found himself
looking at the man who had shot the crossbow. there was something familiar
about those features, about the way the smothering fire made shadows across
them. luck, he told himself. always the luck.
the crossbowman was a good swimmer, thom, he said as he climbed
into the saddle.
what foolery are you talking, now? the gleeman was on his horse, too,
and far more concerned with how his instrument cases rode behind his saddle
than he was with the dead. how could you know whether he could even
swim at all?
he made it ashore from a small boat in the middle of the erinin in the
middle of the night. i guess that used up all his luck. he checked the lashings
on the roll of fireworks again. if that fool thought one of these was aes sedai,
i wonder what hed have thought if they all went off.
are you sure, boy? the chances of it being the same man. . . . why, even
you wouldnt lay a wager against those odds.
i am sure, thom. elayne, i will wring your neck when i put my hands on
you. and egwenes and nynaeves, too. and i am sure i intend to have this
bloody letter out of my hands an hour after we reach caemlyn.
i tell you, there is nothing in that letter, boy. i played daes daemar when


 i was younger than you, and i can recognize a code or a cipher even when i
dont know what it says.
well, i never played your great game, thom, your bloody game of
houses, but i know when someone is chasing me, and theyd not be chasing
this hard or this far for the gold in my pockets, not for less than a chest full of
gold. it has to be the letter. burn me, pretty girls always get me in trouble.
do you feel like sleeping tonight, after this?
with the sleep of an innocent babe, boy. but if you want to ride, ill ride.
the face of a pretty woman floated into mats head, with a dagger in her
throat. you had no luck, pretty woman. then lets ride! he said savagely.


 c h a p t e r
4 5


caemlyn


mat had vague memories of caemlyn, but when they approached it in the
early hours after sunrise, it seemed as if he had never been there before. they
had not been alone on the road since first light, and other riders surrounded
them now, and trains of merchants wagons and folk afoot, all streaming
toward the great city.
built on rising hills, it was surely as large as tar valon, and outside the
huge wallsa fiftyfoot height of pale, grayish stone streaked with white and
silver sparkling in the sun, spaced with tall, round towers with the lion
banner of andor waving atop them, white on redoutside those walls, it
seemed as if another great city had been placed, wrapping around the walled
city, all red brick and gray stone and white plastered walls, inns pushed in on
houses of three and four stories so fine they must belong to wealthy
merchants, shops with goods displayed on tables under awnings crowding
against wide, windowless warehouses. open markets under red and purple
roof tiles lined the road on both sides, men and women already crying their
wares, bargaining at the top of their voices, while penned calves and sheep
and goats and pigs, caged geese and chickens and ducks, added to the din. he
seemed to remember thinking caemlyn was too noisy when he was here
before; now it sounded like a heartbeat, pumping wealth.
the road led to arched gates twenty feet high, standing open under the
watchful eye of redcoated queens guards in their shining breastplatesthey
eyed thom and him no more than anyone else, not even the quarterstaff
slanted across his saddle in front of him; all they cared was that people keep
moving, it seemedand then they were within. slender towers here rose even
taller than those along the walls, and gleaming domes shone white and gold


 above streets teeming with people. just inside the gates the road split into two
parallel streets, separated by a wide strip of grass and trees. the hills of the
city rose like steps toward a peak, which was surrounded by another wall,
shining as white as tar valons, with still more domes and towers within. that
was the inner city, mat recalled, and atop those highest hills stood the royal
palace.
no point waiting, he told thom. ill take the letter straight on. he
looked at the sedan chairs and carriages making their way through the crowds,
the shops with all their goods displayed. a man could earn some gold in this
city, thom, once he found a game of dice, or cards. he was not quite so
lucky at cards as at dice, but few except nobles and the wealthy played those
games anyway. now thats who i should find a game with.
thom yawned at him and hitched at his gleemans cloak as if it were a
blanket. we have ridden all night, boy. lets at least find something to eat,
first. the queens blessing has good meals. he yawned again. and good
beds.
i remember that, mat said slowly. he did, in a way. the innkeeper was a
fat man with graying hair, master gill. moiraine had caught up to rand and
him there, when he had thought they were finally free of her. shes off playing
her game with rand, now. nothing to do with me. not anymore. i will meet
you there, thom. i said id have this letter out of my hands an hour after i
arrived, and i mean to. you go on.
thom nodded and turned his horse aside, calling over his shoulder through
a yawn. do not become lost, boy. its a big city, caemlyn.
and a rich one. mat heeled his mount on up the crowded street. lost! i can
find my bloody way. the sickness appeared to have erased parts of his
memory. he could look at an inn, its upper floors sticking out over the ground
floor all the way around and its sign creaking in the breeze, and remember
seeing it before, yet not recall another thing he could see from that spot. a
hundred paces of street might abruptly spark in his memory, while the parts
before and after remained as mysterious as dice still in the cup.
even with the holes in his memory he was sure he had never been to the
inner city or the royal palacei couldnt forget that!yet he did not need to
remember the way. the streets of the new cityhe remembered that name
suddenly; it was the part of caemlyn less than two thousand years oldran
every which way, but the main boulevards all led to the inner city. the
guards at the gates made no effort to stop anyone.


 within those white walls were buildings that could almost have fit in tar
valon. the curving streets topped hills to reveal thin towers, their tiled walls
sparkling with a hundred colors in the sunlight, or to look down on parks laid
out in patterns made to be viewed from above, or to show sweeping vistas
across the entire city to the rolling plains and forests beyond. it did not really
matter which streets he took here. they all spiraled in on what he sought, the
royal palace of andor.
in no time, he found himself crossing the huge oval plaza before the palace,
riding toward its tall, gilded gates. the pure white palace of andor would
certainly not have been out of place among tar valons wonders, with its
slender towers and golden domes shining in the sun, its high balconies and
intricate stonework. the gold leaf on one of those domes could have kept him
in luxury for a year.
there were fewer people in the plaza than elsewhere, as if it were reserved
for great occasions. a dozen of the guards stood before the closed gates,
bows slanted, all at exactly the same angle, across their gleaming breastplates,
faces hidden by the steel bars of their burnished helmets faceguards. a
heavyset officer, with his red cloak thrown back to reveal a knot of gold braid
on his shoulder, was walking up and down the line, eyeing each man as if he
thought he might find rust or dust.
mat drew rein and put on a smile. good morning to you, captain.
the officer turned, staring at him through the bars of his faceguard with
deep, beady eyes, like a pudgy rat in a cage. the man was older than he had
expectedsurely old enough to have more than one knot of rankand fat
rather than stocky. what do you want, farmer? he demanded roughly.
mat drew a breath. make it good. impress this fool so he doesnt keep me
waiting all day. i dont want to have to flash the amyrlins paper around to
keep from kicking my heels. i come from tar valon, from the white tower,
bearing a letter from
you come from tar valon, farmer? the fat officers stomach shook as he
laughed, but then his laughter cut off as if severed with a knife, and he glared.
we want no letters from tar valon, rogue, if you have such a thing! our
good queenmay the light illumine her!will take no word from the white
tower until the daughterheir is returned to her. i never heard of any
messenger from the tower wearing a countrymans coat and breeches. it is
plain to me you are up to some trick, perhaps thinking youll find a few coins
if you come claiming to carry letters, but you will be lucky if you dont end in


 a prison cell! if you do come from tar valon, go back and tell the tower to
return the daughterheir before we come and take her! if youre a trickster
after silver, get out of my sight before i have you beaten within an inch of
your life! either way, you halfwit looby, be gone!
mat had been trying to edge a word in from the beginning of the mans
speech. he said quickly, the letter is from her, man. it is from
did i not tell you to be gone, ruffian? the fat man bellowed. his face was
growing nearly as red as his coat. take yourself out of my sight, you gutter
scum! if you are not gone by the time i count ten, i will arrest you for littering
the plaza with your presence! one! two!
can you count so high, you fat fool? mat snapped. i tell you, elayne
sent
guards! the officers face was purple now. seize this man for a
darkfriend!
mat hesitated a moment, sure no one could take such a charge seriously,
but the redcoated guards dashed toward him, all dozen men in breastplates
and helmets, and he wheeled his horse and galloped ahead of them, followed
by the fat mans shouts. the gelding was no racer, but it outdistanced men
afoot easily enough. people dodged out of his way along the curving streets,
shaking fists after him and shouting as many curses as the officer had.
fool, he thought, meaning the fat officer, then added another for himself.
all i had to do was say her bloody name in the beginning. elayne, the
daughterheir of andor, sends this letter to her mother, queen morgase.
light, who could have thought theyd think that way about tar valon. from
what he remembered of his last visit, aes sedai and the white tower had
been close behind queen morgase in the guards affections. burn her, elayne
could have told me. reluctantly, he added, i could have asked questions, too.
before he reached the arched gates that let out into the new city, he slowed
to a walk. he did not think the guards from the palace could still be chasing
him, and there was no point in attracting the eyes of those at the gate by
galloping through, but they looked at him no more now than when he had first
entered.
as he rode under the broad arch, he smiled and almost turned back. he had
suddenly remembered something, and had an idea that appealed to him a good
deal more than walking through the palace gates. even if that fat officer had
not been watching the gates, he thought he would like it better.


 he became lost twice while searching for the queens blessing, but at last
he found the sign with a man kneeling before a woman with redgold hair and
a crown of golden roses, her hand on his head. it was a broad stone building
of three stories, with tall windows even up under the red roof tiles. he rode
around back to the stableyard, where a horsefaced fellow, in a leather vest
that could hardly be any tougher than his skin, took his horses reins. he
thought he remembered the fellow. yes. ramey.
it has been a long time, ramey. mat tossed him a silver mark. you
remember me, dont you?
cant say as i . . . ramey began, then caught the shine of silver where he
had expected copper; he coughed, and his short nod turned into something
that combined a knuckled forehead with a jerky bow. why, of course i do,
young master. forgive me. slipped my mind. mind no good for people. good
for horses. i know horses, i do. a fine animal, young master. ill take good
care of him, you can be sure. he delivered it all quickly, with no room for
mat to say a word, then hurried the gelding into the stable before he might
have to come up with mats name.
with a sour grimace, mat put the fat roll of fireworks under his arm and
shouldered the rest of his belongings. fellow couldnt tell me from
hawkwings toenails. a bulky, muscular man was sitting on an upturned
barrel beside the door to the kitchen, gently scratching the ear of a blackandwhite cat crouched on his knee. the man studied mat with heavylidded eyes,
especially the quarterstaff across his shoulder, but he never stopped his
scratching. mat thought he remembered him, but he could not bring up a
name. he said nothing as he went through the door, and neither did the man.
no reason they should remember me. probably have bloody aes sedai coming
for people every day.
in the kitchen, two undercooks and three scullions were darting between
stoves and roasting spits under the direction of a round woman with her hair
in a bun and a long wooden spoon that she used to point out what she wanted
done. mat was sure he remembered the round woman. coline, and what a
name for a woman that wide, but everybody called her cook.
well, cook, he announced, i am back, and not a year since i left.
she peered at him a moment, then nodded. i remember you. he began to
grin. you were with that young prince, werent you? she went on. the one
who looked so like tigraine, the light illumine her memory. youre his
serving man, arent you? is he coming back, then, the young prince?


 no, he said curtly. a prince! light! i do not think he will be anytime
soon, and i dont think you would like it if he did. she protested, saying
what a fine, handsome young man the prince wasburn me, is there a
woman anywhere who doesnt moon over rand and make calfeyes if you
mention his bloody name? shed bloody scream if she knew what he is doing
nowbut he refused to let her get it out. is master gill about? and thom
merrilin?
in the library, she said with a tight sniff. you tell basel gill when you
see him that i said those drains need cleaning. today, mind. she caught sight
of something one of the undercooks was doing to a beef roast and waddled
over to her. not so much, child. you will make the meat too sweet if you put
so much arrath on it. she seemed to have forgotten mat already.
he shook his head as he went in search of this library he could not
remember. he could not remember that coline was married to master gill,
either, but if he had ever heard a goodwife send instructions to her husband,
that had been it. a pretty serving girl with big eyes giggled and directed him
down a hall beside the common room.
when he stepped into the library, he stopped and stared. there had to be
more than three hundred books on the shelves built on the walls, and more
lying on the tables; he had never seen so many books in one place in his life.
he noticed a leatherbound copy of the travels of jain farstrider on a table
near the door. he had always meant to read thatrand and perrin had always
been telling him things out of itbut he never did seem to get around to
reading the books he meant to read.
pinkfaced basel gill and thom merrilin were seated at one of the tables,
facing each other across a stones board, pipes in their teeth trailing thin blue
streamers of tabac smoke. a calico cat sat on the table beside a wooden dice
cup, her tail curled over her feet, watching them play. the gleemans cloak
was nowhere in sight, so mat supposed he had already gotten a room.
youre done sooner than i expected, boy, thom said around his pipestem.
he tugged one long, white mustache as he considered where to place his next
stone on the boards crosshatchings. basel, you remember mat cauthon.
i remember, the fat innkeeper said, peering at the board. sickly, the last
time you were here, i recall. i hope you are better now, lad.
i am better, mat said. is that all you remember? that i was sick?
master gill winced at thoms move and took his pipe out of his mouth.
considering who you left with, lad, and considering the way things are now,


 maybe its best i remember no more than that.
aes sedai not in such good odor now, are they? mat set his things in one
big armchair, the quarterstaff propped against the back, and himself in another
with one leg swinging over the arm. the guards at the palace seemed to
think the white tower had stolen elayne. thom eyed the roll of fireworks
uneasily, looked at his smoking pipe, and muttered to himself before going
back to his study of the board.
hardly that, gill said, but the whole city knows she disappeared from
the tower. thom says shes returned, but weve heard none of that here.
perhaps morgase knows, but everyone down to a stableboy is stepping lightly
so she doesnt snap off his head. lord gaebril has kept her from actually
sending anyone to the headsman, but id not say she would not do it. and he
has certainly not soothed her temper toward tar valon. if anything, i think he
has made it worse.
morgase has a new advisor, thom said in a dry voice. gareth bryne did
not like him, so bryne has been retired to his estate to watch his sheep grow
wool. basel, are you going to place a stone or not?
in a moment, thom. in a moment. i want to set it right. gill clamped his
teeth around his pipestem and frowned at the board, puffing up smoke.
so the queen has an advisor who doesnt like tar valon, mat said. well,
that explains the way the guards acted when i said i came from there.
if you told them that, gill said, you might be lucky you escaped without
any broken bones. if it was any of the new men, at least. gaebril has replaced
half the guards in caemlyn with men of his choosing, and that is no mean
feat considering how short a time he has been here. some say morgase may
marry him. he started to put a stone on the board, then took it back with a
shake of his head. times change. people change. too much change for me. i
suppose i am growing old.
you seem to mean us both to grow old before you place a stone, thom
muttered. the cat stretched and slinked across the table for him to stroke her
back. talking all day will not let you find a good move. why dont you just
admit defeat, basel?
i never admit defeat, gill said stoutly. ill beat you yet, thom. he set a
white stone on the intersection of two lines. you will see. thom snorted.
from what mat could see of the board, he did not think gill had much
chance. i will just have to avoid the guards and put elaynes letter right into


 morgases hands. especially if theyre all like that fat fool. light, i wonder if
hes told them all im a darkfriend?
you did not deliver it? thom barked. i thought you were anxious to be
rid of the thing.
you have a letter from the daughterheir? gill exclaimed. thom, why
did you not tell me?
i am sorry, basel, the gleeman muttered. he glared at mat from under
those bushy eyebrows and blew out his mustaches. the boy thinks someone
is out to kill him over it, so i thought id let him say what he wanted and no
more. seems he does not care any longer.
what kind of letter? gill asked. is she coming home? and lord
gawyn? i hope they are. ive actually heard talk of war with tar valon, as if
anyone could be fool enough to go to war with aes sedai. if you ask me, it is
all one with those mad rumors weve heard about aes sedai supporting a
false dragon somewhere in the west, and using the power as a weapon. not
that i can see why that would make anyone want to go to war with them; just
the opposite.
are you married to coline? mat asked, and master gill gave a start.
the light preserve me from that! you would think the inn was hers now.
if she was my wife . . . ! what does that have to do with the daughterheirs
letter?
nothing, mat said, but you went on so long, i thought you must have
forgotten your own questions. gill made a choking sound, and thom barked
a laugh. mat hurried on before the innkeeper could speak. the letter is
sealed; elayne did not tell me what it says. thom was eyeing him sideways
and stroking his mustaches. does he think ill admit we opened the thing?
but i dont think she is coming home. she means to be aes sedai, if you ask
me. he told them about his attempt to deliver the letter, smoothing over a
few edges they had no need to know about.
the new men, gill said. that officer sounds it, at least. ill wager on it.
no better than brigands, most of them, except the ones with a sly eye. you
wait until this afternoon, lad, when the guards on the gate will have changed.
say the daughterheirs name right out, and just in case the new fellow is one
of gaebrils men, too, duck your head a little. a knuckle to your forehead, and
youll have no trouble.
burn me if i will. i pull wool and scratch gravel for nobody. not to


 morgase herself. this time, ill not go near the guards at all. i would just as
soon not know what word that fat fellow has spread. they stared at him as if
he were mad.
how under the light, gill said, do you mean to enter the royal palace
without passing the guards? his eyes widened as if he were remembering
something. light, you dont mean to. . . . lad, youd need the dark ones
own luck to escape with your life!
what are you going on about now, basel? mat, what fool thing do you
intend to try?
i am lucky, master gill, mat said. you just have a good meal waiting
when i come back. as he stood, he picked up the dice cup and spun the dice
out beside the stones board for luck. the calico cat leaped down, hissing at
him with her back arched. the five spotted dice came to rest, each showing a
single pip. the dark ones eyes.
thats the best toss or the worst, gill said. it depends on the game you
are playing, doesnt it. lad, i think you mean to play a dangerous game. why
dont you take that cup out into the common room and lose a few coppers?
you look to me like a fellow who might like a little gamble. i will see the
letter gets to the palace safely.
coline wants you to clean the drains, mat told him, and turned to thom
while the innkeeper was still blinking and muttering to himself. it doesnt
seem to make any odds whether i get an arrow in me trying to deliver that
letter or a knife in my back waiting. its six up, and a half dozen down. just
you have that meal waiting, thom. he tossed a gold mark on the table in
front of gill. have my things put in a room, innkeeper. if it takes more coin,
you will have it. be careful of the big roll; it frightens thom something
awful.
as he stalked out, he heard gill say to thom, i always thought that lad
was a rascal. how does he come by gold?
i always win, thats how, he thought grimly. i just have to win once more,
and im done with elayne, and thats the last of the white tower for me. just
once more.


 c h a p t e r
4 6


a message out of the shadow


even as he returned to the inner city on foot, mat was far from certain that
what he intended would actually work. it would, if what he had been told was
true, but it was the truth of that he was not sure of. he avoided the oval plaza
in front of the palace, but wandered around the sides of the huge structure and
its grounds, along streets that curved with the contours of the hills. the
golden domes of the palace glittered, mockingly out of reach. he had made
his way almost all the way around, nearly back to the plaza, when he saw it. a
steep slope thick with low flowers, rising from the street to a white wall of
rough stone. several leafy tree limbs stuck over the top of the wall, and he
could see the tops of others beyond, in a garden of the royal palace.
a wall made to look like a cliff, he thought, and a garden on the other side.
maybe rand was telling the truth.
a casual look both ways showed him he had the curving street to himself
for the moment. he would have to hurry; the curves did not allow him to see
very far; someone could come along any moment. he scrambled up the slope
on all fours, careless of how his boots ripped holes in the banks of red and
white blossoms. the rough stone of the wall gave plenty of fingerholds, and
ridges and knobs provided toeholds even for a man in boots.
careless of them to make it so easy, he thought as he climbed. for a
moment the climbing took him back home with rand and perrin, to a journey
they had made beyond the sand hills, into the edge of the mountains of mist.
when they returned to emonds field, they had all caught the fury from
everyone who could lay hands on themhim worst of all; everyone assumed
it had been his ideabut for three days they had climbed the cliffs, and slept
under the sky, and eaten eggs filched from redcrests nests, and plump, gray


 winged grouse fetched with an arrow, or a stone from a sling, and rabbits
caught with snares, all the while laughing about how they were not afraid of
the mountains bad luck and how they might find a treasure. he had brought
home an odd rock from that expedition, with the skull of a goodsized fish
somehow pressed into it, and a long, white tail feather dropped by a snow
eagle, and a piece of white stone as big as his hand that looked almost as if it
had been carved into a mans ear. he thought it looked like an ear, even if
rand and perrin did not, and tam althor had said it might be.
his fingers slipped out of a shallow groove, his balance shifted and he lost
the toehold under his left foot. with a gasp, he barely caught hold of the top
of the wall, and pulled himself up the rest of the way. for a moment he lay
there, breathing hard. it would not have been that long a fall, but enough to
break his head. fool, letting my mind wander like that. nearly killed myself
on those cliffs that way. that was all a long time ago. his mother had likely
thrown all those things out already, anyway. with one last look each way to
make sure no one had seen himthe curving length of street below was still
emptyhe dropped inside the palace grounds.
it was a large garden, with flagstoned walks through expanses of grass
among the trees, and grapevines thick on arbors over the walks. and
everywhere, flowers. white blossoms covering the pear trees, and white and
pink dotting the apple trees. roses in every color, and bright golden sunburst,
and purple emonds glory, and many he could not identify. some he was not
sure could be real. one had odd blossoms in scarlet and gold that looked
almost like birds, and another seemed no different from a sunflower except
that its yellow flowers were two feet and more across and stood on stalks as
tall as an ogier.
boots crunched on flagstone, and he crouched low behind a bush against
the wall as two guardsmen marched past, their long, white collars hanging
over their breastplates. they never glanced his way, and he grinned to
himself. luck. with just a little luck, theyll never see me till i hand the bloody
thing to morgase.
he slipped through the garden like a shadow, as if stalking rabbits, freezing
by a bush or hard against a tree trunk when he heard boots. two more pairs of
soldiers strode by along the paths, the second close enough for him to have
taken two steps and goosed them. as they vanished among the flowers and
trees, he plucked a deep red starblaze and stuck the wavypetaled flower in
his hair with a grin. this was as much fun as stealing applecakes at sunday,
and easier. women always kept a sharp watch on their baking; the fool


 soldiers never took their eyes off the flagstones.
it was not long before he found himself against the white wall of the palace
itself, and began sliding along it behind a row of flowering white roses on
slatted frames, searching for a door. there were plenty of wide, arched
windows just over his head, but he thought it might be a bit harder to explain
being found climbing in through a window than walking down a hall. two
more soldiers appeared, and he froze; they would pass within three paces of
him. he could hear voices from the window over his head, two men, just loud
enough for him to make out the words.
on their way to tear, great master. the man sounded frightened and
obsequious.
let them ruin his plans, if they can. this voice was deeper and stronger,
a man used to command. it will serve him right if three untrained girls can
foil him. he was always a fool, and he is still a fool. is there any word of the
boy? he is the one who can destroy us all.
no, great master. he has vanished. but, great master, one of the girls is
morgases nit.
mat half turned, then caught himself. the soldiers were coming closer; they
did not appear to have seen his start through the thickly woven rose stems.
move, you fools! get by so i can see who this man bloody is! he had lost
some of the conversation.
has been far too impatient since regaining his freedom, the deep voice
was saying. he never realized the best plans take time to mature. he wants
the world in a day, and callandor besides. the great lord take him! he may
seize the girl and try to make some use of her. and that might strain my own
plans.
as you say, great master. shall i order her brought out of tear?
no. the fool would take it as a move against him, if he knew. and who
can say what he chooses to watch aside from the sword? see that she dies
quietly, comar. let her death attract no notice at all. his laughter was a rich
rumble. those ignorant slatterns in their tower will have a difficult time
producing her after this disappearance. this may all be just as well. let it be
done quickly. quickly, before he has time to take her himself.
the two soldiers were almost abreast of him; mat tried to will their feet to
move faster.
great master, the other man said uncertainly, that may be difficult. we


 know she is on her way to tear, but the vessel she traveled on was found at
aringill, and all three of them had left it earlier. we do not know whether she
has taken another ship, or is riding south. and it may not be easy to find her
once she reaches tear, great master. perhaps if you
are there none but fools in the world, now? the deep voice said harshly.
do you think i could move in tear without him knowing? i do not mean to
fight him, not now, not yet. bring me the girls head, comar. bring me all
three heads, or you will pray for me to take yours!
yes, great master. it shall be as you say. yes. yes.
the soldiers crunched past, never looking to either side. mat only waited
for their backs to pass before leaping up to catch the broad stone windowsill
and pull himself high enough to see through the window.
he barely noticed the fringed tarabon carpet on the floor, worth a fat purse
of silver. one of the broad, carved doors was swinging shut. a tall man, with
wide shoulders and a deep chest straining the green silk of his silverembroidered coat, was staring at the door with dark blue eyes. his black beard
was close cut, with a streak of white over his chin. all in all, he looked a hard
man, and one used to giving orders.
yes, great master, he said suddenly, and mat almost lost his grip on the
sill. he had thought this must be the man with the deep voice, but it was the
cringing voice he heard. not cringing now, but still the same. it shall be as
you say, great master, the man said bitterly. i will cut the three wenches
heads off myself. as soon as i can find them! he strode through the door,
and mat let himself back down.
for a moment he crouched there behind the rose frames. someone in the
palace wanted elayne dead, and had thrown in egwene and nynaeve as
afterthoughts. what under the light are they doing, going to tear? it had to
be them.
he pulled the daughterheirs letter out of the lining of his coat and
frowned at it. maybe, with this in his hand, morgase would believe him. he
could describe one of the men. but the time for skulking was past; the big
fellow could be off to tear before he even found morgase, and whatever she
did then, there was no guarantee it could stop him.
taking a deep breath, mat wiggled between two of the rose frames at the
cost of only a few pricks and snags from the thorns, and started down the
flagstone path after the soldiers. he held elaynes letter out in front of him so
the golden lily seal was plainly visible, and went over in his mind exactly


 what he meant to say. when he had been sneaking about, guardsmen kept
popping up like mushrooms after rain, but now he walked almost the length
of the garden without seeing even one. he passed several doors. it would not
be so good to enter the palace without permissionthe guards might do
nasty things first and listen afterbut he was beginning to think about going
through a door when it opened and a helmetless young officer with one
golden knot on his shoulder strode out.
the mans hand immediately went to his sword hilt, and he had a foot of
steel bared before mat could push the letter toward him. elayne, the
daughterheir, sends this letter to her mother, queen morgase, captain. he
held the letter so the lily seal was prominent.
the officers dark eyes flickered to either side, as if searching for other
people, without really ever leaving mat. how did you come into this
garden? he did not draw his sword further, but he did not sheath it, either.
elber is on the main gates. hes a fool, but he would never let anyone
wander loose into the palace.
a fat man with eyes like a rat? mat cursed his tongue, but the officer
gave a sharp nod; he almost smiled, too, but it did not seem to lessen his
vigilance, or his suspicion. he grew angry when he learned i had come from
tar valon, and he wouldnt even give me a chance to show the letter or
mention the daughterheirs name. he said he would arrest me if i did not go,
so i climbed the wall. i promised i would deliver this to queen morgase
herself, you see, captain. i promised it, and i always keep my promises. you
see the seal?
that bloody garden wall again, the officer muttered. it should be built
three times so high. he eyed mat. guardsmanlieutenant, not captain. i am
guardsmanlieutenant tallanvor. i recognize the daughterheirs seal. his
sword finally slid all the way back into the sheath. he stretched out a hand;
not his sword hand. give me the letter, and i will take it to the queen. after i
show you out. some would not be so gentle at finding you walking about
loose.
i promised to put it in her hands myself, mat said. light, i never thought
they might not let me give it to her. i did promise. to the daughterheir.
mat hardly realized tallanvors hand was moving before the officers
sword was resting against his neck. i will take you to the queen,
countryman, tallanvor said softly. but know that i can take your head
before you blink if you so much as think of harming her.


 mat put on his best grin. that slightly curved blade felt sharp on the side of
his neck. i am a loyal andorman, he said, and a faithful subject of the
queen, the light illumine her. why, if i had been here during the winter, id
have followed lord gaebril for sure.
tallanvor gave him a tightmouthed stare, then finally took his sword away.
mat swallowed and stopped himself from touching his throat to see if he had
been cut.
take the flower out of your hair, tallanvor said as he sheathed his blade.
do you think you came here courting?
mat snatched the starblaze blossom out of his hair and followed the officer.
bloody fool, putting a flower in my hair. i have to stop playing the fool, now.
it was not so much following, really, for tallanvor kept an eye on him even
while he led the way. the result was an odd sort of procession, with the
officer to one side of him and ahead, but half turned in case mat tried
anything. for his part, mat attempted to look as innocent as a babe splashing
in his bathwater.
the colorful tapestries on the walls had earned their weavers silver, and so
had the rugs on the white tile floors, even here in the halls. gold and silver
stood everywhere, plates and platters, bowls and cups, on chests and low
cabinets of polished wood, as fine as anything he had seen in the tower.
servants darted everywhere, in red livery with white collars and cuffs and the
white lion of andor on their breasts. he found himself wondering if
morgase played at dice. woolheaded thought. queens dont toss dice. but
when i give her this letter and tell her somebody in her palace means to kill
elayne, ill wager she gives me a fat purse. he indulged himself in a small
fancy of being made a lord; surely the man who revealed a plot to murder the
daughterheir could expect some such reward.
tallanvor led him down so many corridors and across so many courtyards
that he was beginning to wonder if he could find his way out again without
help, when suddenly one of the courts had more than servants in it. a
columned walk surrounded the court, with a round pool in the middle with
white and yellow fish swimming beneath lily pads and floating white water
lilies. men in colorful coats embroidered in gold or silver, women with wide
dresses worked even more elaborately, stood attendance on a woman with
redgold hair who sat on the raised rim of the pool, trailing her fingers in the
water and staring sadly at the fish that rose to her fingertips in hopes of food.
a great serpent ring encircled the third finger of her left hand. a tall, dark


 man stood at her shoulder, the red silk of his coat almost hidden by the gold
leaves and scrolls worked on it, but it was the woman who held mats eye.
he did not need the wreath of finely made golden roses in her hair, or the
stole hanging over her dress of white slashed with red, the red length of the
stole embroidered with the lions of andor, to know he was looking at
morgase, by the grace of the light, queen of andor, defender of the realm,
protector of the people, high seat of house trakand. she had elaynes face
and beauty, but it was what elayne would have when she had ripened. every
other woman in the courtyard faded into the background by her very presence.
id dance a jig with her, and steal a kiss in the moonlight, too, no matter
how old she is. he shook himself. remember exactly who she is!
tallanvor went to one knee, a fist pressed to the white stone of the
courtyard. my queen, i bring a messenger who bears a letter from the lady
elayne.
mat eyed the mans posture, then contented himself with a deep bow.
from the daughterheir . . . uh . . . my queen. he held out the letter as he
bowed, so the golden yellow wax of the seal was visible. once she reads it,
and knows elayne is all right, i will tell her. morgase turned her deep blue
eyes on him. light! as soon as shes in a good mood.
you bring a letter from my scapegrace child? her voice was cold, but
with an edge that spoke of heat ready to rise. that must mean she is alive, at
least! where is she?
in tar valon, my queen, he managed to get out. light, wouldnt i like to
see a staring match between her and the amyrlin. on second thought, he
decided he would rather not. at least, she was when i left.
morgase waved a hand impatiently, and tallanvor rose to take the letter
from mat and hand it to her. for a moment she frowned at the lily seal, then
broke it with a sharp twist of her wrists. she murmured to herself as she read,
shaking her head at every other line. she can say no more, can she? she
muttered. we shall see whether she holds to that. . . .abruptly her face
brightened. gaebril, she has been raised to the accepted. less than a year in
the tower, and raised already. the smile went as suddenly as it had come,
and her mouth tightened. when i put my hands on the wretched child, she
will wish she were still a novice.
light, mat thought, will nothing put her in a good mood? he decided he
was just going to have to say it out, but he wished she did not look as if she
meant to cut someones head off. my queen, by chance i overheard


 be silent, boy, the dark man in the goldencrusted coat said calmly. he
was a handsome man, almost as goodlooking as galad and nearly as
youthfulseeming, despite the white streaking his temples, but built on a
bigger scale, with more than rands height and very nearly perrins shoulders.
we will hear what you have to say in a moment. he reached over
morgases shoulder and plucked the letter out of her hand. her glare turned
on himmat could see her temper heatingbut the dark man laid a strong
hand on her shoulder, never taking his eyes off what he was reading, and
morgases anger melted. it seems she has left the tower again, he said. on
the service of the amyrlin seat. the woman oversteps herself again,
morgase.
mat had no trouble holding his tongue. luck. it was stuck to the roof of his
mouth. sometimes i dont know if its good or bad. the dark man was the
owner of the deep voice, the great master who wanted elaynes head. she
called him gaebril. her advisor wants to murder elayne? light! and
morgase was staring up at him like an adoring dog with her masters hand on
her shoulder.
gaebril turned nearly black eyes on mat. the man had a forceful gaze, and
a look of knowing. what can you tell us of this, boy?
nothing . . . uh . . . my lord. mat cleared his throat; the mans stare was
worse than the amyrlins. i went to tar valon to see my sister. shes a
novice. else grinwell. im thom grinwell, my lord. the lady elayne
learned i was meaning to see caemlyn on my way back homeim from
comfrey, my lord; a little village north of baerlon; id never seen any place
bigger than baerlon before i went to tar valonand shethe lady elayne, i
meangave me that letter to bring. he thought morgase had glanced at him
when he said he came from north of baerlon, but he knew there was a village
called comfrey there; he remembered hearing it mentioned.
gaebril nodded, but he said, do you know where elayne was going, boy?
or on what business? speak the truth, and you have nothing to fear. lie, and
you will be put to the question.
mat did not have to pretend a worried frown. my lord, i only saw the
daughterheir the once. she gave me the letterand a gold mark!and told
me to bring it to the queen. i know no more of what is in it than ive heard
here. gaebril appeared to consider it, with no sign on that dark face of
whether he believed a word or not.
no, gaebril, morgase said suddenly. too many have been put to the


 question. i can see the need as you have shown it to me, but not for this. not a
boy who only brought a letter whose contents he does not know.
as my queen commands, so shall it be, the dark man said. the tone was
respectful, but he touched her cheek in a way that made color come to her
face and her lips part as if she expected a kiss.
morgase drew an unsteady breath. tell me, thom grinwell, did my
daughter look well when you saw her?
yes, my queen. she smiled, and laughed, and showed a saucy tonguei
mean. . . .
morgase laughed softly at the look on his face. do not be afraid, young
man. elayne does have a saucy tongue, far too often for her own good. i am
happy she is well. those blue eyes studied him deeply. a young man who
has left his small village often finds it difficult to return to it. i think you will
travel far before you see comfrey again. perhaps you will even return to tar
valon. if you do, and if you see my daughter, tell her that what is said in anger
is often repented. i will not remove her from the white tower before time.
tell her that i often think of my own time there, and miss the quiet talks with
sheriam in her study. tell her that i said that, thom grinwell.
mat shrugged uncomfortably. yes, my queen. but . . . uh . . . i do not
mean to go to tar valon again. once in any mans life is enough. my da needs
me to help work the farm. my sisters will be stuck with the milking, with me
gone.
gaebril laughed, a deep rumble of amusement. are you anxious then to
milk cows, boy? perhaps you should see something of the world before it
changes. here! he produced a purse and tossed it; mat felt coins through the
washleather when he caught it. if elayne can give you a gold mark for
carrying her letter, i will give you ten for bringing it safely. see the world
before you go back to your cows.
yes, my lord. mat lifted the purse and managed a weak grin. thank
you, my lord.
but the dark man had already waved him away and turned to morgase with
his fists on his hips. i think the time has come, morgase, to lance that
festering sore on the border of andor. by your marriage to taringail
damodred, you have a claim to the sun throne. the queens guards can
make that claim as strong as any. perhaps i can even aid them, in some small
way. hear me.


 tallanvor touched mat on the arm, and they backed away, bowing. mat did
not think anyone noticed. gaebril was still speaking, and every lord and lady
seemed to hang on his words. morgase was frowning as she listened, yet she
nodded as much as any other.


 c h a p t e r
4 7


to race the shadow


from the small courtyard with its pool of fish, tallanvor led mat swiftly to
the great court at the front of the palace, behind the tall, gilded gates gleaming
in the sun. it would be midday, soon. mat felt an urge to be gone, a need to
hurry. it was hard keeping his pace to the young officers. someone might
wonder, if he started running, and maybejust maybethings had really
been the way they seemed back there. maybe gaebril really did not suspect
that he knew. maybe. he remembered those nearly black eyes, seizing and
holding like a pair of pitchfork tines through his head. light, maybe. he
forced himself to walk as if he had all the time in the worldjust a haybrain
country lout staring at the rugs and the gold. just a mudfoot whod never
think anyone might put a knife in his backuntil tallanvor let him through a
sallyport in one of the gates, and followed him out.
the fat officer with the rats eyes was still there with the guards, and when
he saw mat his face went red again. before he could open his mouth, though,
tallanvor spoke. he has delivered a letter to the queen from the daughterheir. be glad, elber, that neither morgase nor gaebril knows you tried to
keep it from them. lord gaebril was most interested in the lady elaynes
missive.
elbers face went from red to as white as his collar. he glared once at mat,
and scuttled back along the line of guardsmen, his beady eyes peering through
the bars of their faceguards as if to determine whether any of them had seen
his fear.
thank you, mat told tallanvor, and meant it. he had forgotten all about
the fat man until he was staring him in the face again. fare you well,
tallanvor.


 he started across the oval plaza, trying not to walk too fast, and was
surprised when tallanvor walked along. light, is he gaebrils man, or
morgases? he was just beginning to feel an itch between his shoulder blades,
as if a knife might be about to go inhe doesnt know, burn me! gaebril
doesnt suspect i know!when the young officer finally spoke.
did you spend long in tar valon? in the white tower? long enough to
learn anything of it?
i was only there three days, mat said cautiously. he would have made the
time lessif he could have delivered the letter without admitting ever being
in tar valon, he would havebut he did not think the man would believe he
had gone all that way to see his sister and left the same day. what under the
light is he after? i learned what i saw in that time. nothing of any
importance. they did not guide me around and tell me things. i was only
there to see else.
you must have heard something, man. who is sheriam? does talking to
her in her study mean anything?
mat shook his head vigorously to keep relief from showing on his face. i
dont know who she is, he said truthfully. perhaps he had heard egwene, or
perhaps nynaeve, mention the name. an aes sedai, maybe? why should it
mean anything?
i do not know, tallanvor said softly. there is too much i do not know.
sometimes i think she is trying to say something. . . . he gave mat a sharp
look. are you a loyal andorman, thom grinwell?
of course i am. light, if i say that much more often, i may start believing
it. what about you? do you serve morgase and gaebril loyally?
tallanvor gave him a look as hard as the dices mercy. i serve morgase,
thom grinwell. her, i serve to the death. fare you well! he turned and
strode back toward the palace with a hand gripping his sword hilt.
watching him go, mat muttered to himself. i will wager thishe gave
gaebrils washleather purse a tossthat gaebril says the same. whatever
games they played in the palace, he wanted no place in any of them. and he
meant to make sure egwene and the others were out of them, too. fool
women! now i have to keep their bacon from burning instead of looking after
my own! he did not start to run until the streets hid him from the palace.
when he came dashing into the queens blessing, nothing very much had
changed in the library. thom and the innkeeper still sat over the stones board


 a different game, he saw from the positions of the stones, but no better for
gilland the calico cat was back on the table, washing herself. a tray
holding their unlit pipes and the remains of a meal for two sat near the cat,
and his belongings were gone from the armchair. each man had a wine cup at
his elbow.
i will be leaving, master gill, he said. you can keep the coin and take a
meal out of it. ill stay long enough to eat, but then i am on the road to tear.
what is your hurry, boy? thom seemed to be watching the cat more than
the board. we only just arrived here.
you delivered the lady elaynes letter, then? the innkeeper said eagerly.
and kept your skin whole, it seems. did you really climb over that wall like
the other young man? no, that does not matter. did the letter soothe morgase?
do we still have to keep tiptoeing on eggs, man?
i suppose it soothed her, mat said. i think it did. he hesitated a
moment, bouncing gaebrils purse on his hand. it made a clinking sound. he
had not looked to see if it really held ten gold marks; the weight was about
right. master gill, what can you tell me of gaebril? aside from the fact that
he does not like aes sedai. you said he had not been in caemlyn long?
why do you want to know about him? thom asked. basel, are you
going to place a stone or not? the innkeeper sighed and stuck a black stone
on the board, and the gleeman shook his head.
well, lad, gill said, there is not much to tell. he came out of the west
during the winter. somewhere out your way, i think. maybe it was the two
rivers. ive heard the mountains mentioned.
we have no lords in the two rivers, mat said. maybe there are some up
around baerlon. i do not know.
that could be it, lad. i had never even heard of him before, but i do not
keep up with the country lords. came while morgase was still in tar valon,
he did, and half the city was afraid the tower was going to make her
disappear, too. the other half did not want her back. the riots started up
again, the way they did last year at the tail of winter.
mat shook his head. i do not care about politics, master gill. its gaebril i
want to know about. thom frowned at him, and began cleaning the dottle
from his longstemmed pipe with a straw.
it is gaebril i am telling you about, lad, gill said. during the riots, he
made himself leader of the faction supporting morgasegot himself


 wounded in the fighting, i hearand by the time she returned, he had it all
suppressed. gareth bryne didnt like gaebrils methodshe can be a very
hard manbut morgase was so pleased to find order restored that she named
him to the post elaida used to hold.
the innkeeper stopped. mat waited for him to go on, but he did not. thom
thumbed his pipe full of tabac and walked over to light a spill at a small lamp
kept for the purpose on the mantel above the fireplace.
what else? mat asked. the man has to have a reason for what he does.
if he marries morgase, would he be king when she dies? if elayne were dead,
too, i mean?
thom choked lighting his pipe, and gill laughed. andor has a queen, lad.
always a queen. if morgase and elayne both diedthe light send it not so!
then morgases nearest female relative would take the throne. at least
theres no question of who that is this timea cousin, the lady dyelinnot
like the succession, after tigraine vanished. it took two years before morgase
sat on the lion throne, then. dyelin could keep gaebril as her advisor, or
marry him to cement the linethough she would not likely do that unless
morgase had had a child by himbut he would be the prince consort even
then. no more than that. thank the light, morgase is a young woman, yet.
and elayne is healthy. light! the letter did not say she is ill, did it?
she is well. for now, at least. isnt there anything else you can tell me
about him? you do not seem to like him. why?
the innkeeper frowned in thought, and scratched his chin, and shook his
head. i suppose i would not like him marrying morgase, but i do not truly
know why. hes said to be a fine man; the nobles all look to him. i do not like
most of the men hes brought into the guards. too much has changed since he
came, but i cannot lay it all at his door. there just seem to be too many people
muttering in corners since he came. you would think we were all cairhienin,
the way they were before this civil war, all plotting and trying to find
advantage. i keep having bad dreams since gaebril came, and i am not the
only one. fool thing to worry about, dreams. it is probably only worry about
elayne, and what morgase means to do concerning the white tower, and
people acting like cairhienin. i just do not know. why are you asking all
these questions about lord gaebril?
because he wants to kill elayne, mat said, and egwene and nynaeve
with her. there was nothing useful in what gill had told him that he could
see. burn me, i dont have to know why he wants them dead. i just have to


 stop it. both men were staring at him again. as if he were mad. again.
are you coming down sick again? gill said suspiciously. i remember
you staring crossways at everyone the last time. its either that, or else you
think this is some sort of prank. you have the look of a prankster to me. if that
is it, its a nasty one!
mat grimaced. it is no bloody prank. i overheard him telling some man
called comar to cut elaynes head off. and egwenes and nynaeves while he
was about it. a big man, with a white stripe in his beard.
that does sound like lord comar, gill said slowly. he was a fine
soldier, but it is said he left the guard over some matter of weighted dice. not
that anyone says it to his face; comar was one of the best blades in the
guards. you really mean it, dont you?
i think he does, basel, thom said. i very much think he does.
the light shine on us! what did morgase say? you did tell her, didnt
you? the light burn you, you did tell her!
of course, i did, mat said bitterly. with gaebril standing right there, and
her gazing at him like a lovesick lapdog! i said, i may be a simple village
man who just climbed over your wall half an hour past, but i already happen
to know your trusted advisor there, the one you seem to be in love with,
intends to murder your daughter. light, man, shed have cut my head off!
she might have at that. thom stared into the elaborate carvings on the
bowl of his pipe and tugged one mustache. her temper was ever as sudden as
lightning, and twice as dangerous.
you know it better than most, thom, gill said absently. staring at
nothing, he scrubbed both hands through his graying hair. there has to be
something i can do. i havent held a sword since the aiel war, but. . . . well,
that would do no good. get myself killed and do nothing by it. but i must do
something!
rumor. thom rubbed the side of his nose; he seemed to be studying the
stones board and talking to himself. no one can keep rumors from reaching
morgases ears, and if she hears it strongly enough, she will start to wonder.
rumor is the voice of the people, and the voice of the people often speaks
truth. morgase knows that. there is not a man alive i would back against her
in the game. love or no love, once morgase starts examining gaebril closely,
hell not be able to hide as much as his childhood scars from her. and if she
learns he means harm to elaynehe placed a stone on the board; it seemed


 an odd placement at first glance, but mat saw that in three more moves, a
third of gills stones would be trappedlord gaebril will have a most
elaborate funeral.
you and your game of houses, gill muttered. still, it might work. a
sudden smile appeared on his face. i even know who to tell to start it. all i
need do is mention to gilda that i dreamed it, and in three days shell have
told serving girls in half the new city that it is a fact. she is the greatest
gossip the creator ever made.
just be certain it cannot be traced back to you, basel.
no fear of that, thom. why a week ago, a man told me one of my own
bad dreams as a thing hed heard from somebody whod had it from someone
else. gilda must have eavesdropped on me telling it to coline, but when i
asked, he gave me a string of names that led all the way to the other side of
caemlyn and vanished. why, i actually went over there and found the last
man, just out of curiosity to see how many mouths had passed it, and he
claimed it was his very own dream. no fear, thom.
mat did not really care what they did with their rumorsno rumors would
help egwene or the othersbut one thing puzzled him. thom, you seem to
be taking this all very calmly. i thought morgase was the great love of your
life.
the gleeman stared into the bowl of his pipe again. mat, a very wise
woman once told me that time would heal my wounds, that time smoothed
everything over. i didnt believe her. only she was right.
you mean you do not love morgase anymore.
boy, it has been fifteen years since i left caemlyn a half step ahead of the
headsmans axe, with the ink of morgases signature still wet on the warrant.
sitting here listening to basel natter ongill protested, and thom raised his
voicenatter on, i say, about morgase and gaebril, and how they might
marry, i realized the passion faded a long time gone. oh, i suppose i am still
fond of her, perhaps i even love her a little, but it is not a grand passion
anymore.
and here i half thought youd go running up to the palace to warn her.
he laughed, and was surprised when thom joined him.
i am not so big a fool as that, boy. any fool knows men and women think
differently at times, but the biggest difference is this. men forget, but never
forgive; women forgive, but never forget. morgase might kiss my cheek and


 give me a cup of wine and say how she has missed me. and then she might
just let the guards haul me off to prison and the headsman. no. morgase is
one of the most capable women ive ever known, and that is saying
something. i could almost pity gaebril once she learns what he is up to. tear,
you say? is there any chance of you waiting until tomorrow to leave? i could
use a nights sleep.
i mean to be as far toward tear as i can before nightfall. mat blinked.
do you mean to come with me? i thought you meant to stay here.
did you not just hear me say i had decided not to have my head cut off?
tear sounds a safer place to me than caemlyn, and suddenly that does not
seem so bad. besides, i like those girls. a knife appeared in his hand and
was as suddenly gone again. id not like anything to happen to them. but if
you mean to reach tear quickly, its aringill you want. a fast boat will have
us there days sooner than horses, even if we rode them to death. and i dont
say it just because my bottom has already taken on the shape of a saddle.
aringill, then. as long as its fast.
well, gill said, i suppose if you are leaving, lad, i had better see about
getting you that meal. he pushed back his chair and started for the door.
hold this for me, master gill, mat said, and tossed him the washleather
purse.
whats this, lad? coin?
stakes. gaebril doesnt know it, but he and i have a wager. the cat
jumped down as mat picked up the wooden dice cup and spun the dice out on
the table. five sixes. and i always win.


 c h a p t e r
4 8


following the craft


as the darter wallowed toward the docks of tear, on the west bank of the
river erinin, egwene did not see anything of the oncoming city. slumped
head down at the rail, she stared down at the waters of the erinin rolling past
the ships fat hull, and the frontmost sweep on her side as it swung into her
vision and back again, cutting white furrows in the river. it made her queasy,
but she knew raising her head would only make the sickness worse. looking
at the shore would only make the slow, corkscrew motion of the darter more
apparent.
the vessel had moved in that twisting roll ever since jurene. she did not
care how it had sailed before then; she found herself wishing the darter had
sunk before reaching jurene. she wished they had made the captain put in at
aringill so they could find another ship. she wished they had never gone near
a ship. she wished a great many things, most of them just to take her mind off
where she was.
the twisting was less now, under sweeps, than it had been under sail, but it
had gone on too many days now for the change to make much difference to
her. her stomach seemed to be sloshing about inside her like milk in a stone
jug. she gulped and tried to forget that image.
they had not done much in the way of planning on the darter, she and
elayne and nynaeve. nynaeve could seldom go ten minutes without
vomiting, and seeing that always made egwene lose whatever food she had
managed to get down. the increasing warmth as they went further downriver
did not help. nynaeve was below now, no doubt with elayne holding a basin
for her again.


 oh, light, no! dont think about that! green fields. meadows. light,
meadows do not heave like that. hummingbirds. no, not hummingbirds!
larks. larks singing.
mistress joslyn? mistress joslyn!
it took her a moment to recognize the name she had chosen to give captain
canin, and the captains voice. she raised her head slowly and fixed her eyes
on his long face.
we are docking, mistress joslyn. youve kept saying how eager you were
to be ashore. well, were there. his voice did not hide his eagerness to be rid
of his three passengers, two of whom did little more than sick up, as he called
it, and moan all night.
barefoot, shirtless sailors were tossing lines to men on the stone dock that
thrust out into the river; the dockmen seemed to be wearing long leather vests
in place of shirts. the sweeps had already been drawn in, except for a pair
fending the ship off from coming against the dock too hard. the flat stones of
the dock were wet; the air had a feel of rain not long gone, and that was a
little soothing. the twisting motion had ceased some time since, she realized,
but her stomach remembered. the sun was falling toward the west. she tried
not to think of supper.
very good, captain canin, she said with all the dignity she could
summon. hed not sound like that if i were wearing my ring, not even if i
were sick on his boots. she shuddered at the picture in her mind.
her great serpent ring and the twisted ring of the terangreal hung on a
leather cord about her neck, now. the stone ring felt cool against her skin
almost enough to counteract the damp warmth of the airbut aside from that,
she had found that the more she used the terangreal, the more she wanted to
touch it, without pouch or cloth between it and her.
telaranrhiod still showed her little of immediate use. sometimes there
had been glimpses of rand, or mat, or perrin, and more in her own dreams
without the terangreal, but nothing of which she could make any sense. the
seanchan, who she refused to think about. nightmares of a whitecloak
putting master luhhan in the middle of a huge, toothed trap for bait. why
should perrin have a falcon on his shoulder, and what was important about
him choosing between that axe he wore now and a blacksmiths hammer?
what did it mean that mat was dicing with the dark one, and why did he
keep shouting, i am coming! and why did she think in the dream that he
was shouting at her? and rand. he had been sneaking through utter darkness


 toward callandor, while all around him six men and five women walked,
some hunting him and some ignoring him, some trying to guide him toward
the shining crystal sword and some trying to stop him from reaching it,
appearing not to know where he was, or only to see him in flashes. one of the
men had eyes of flame, and he wanted rand dead with a desperation she
could nearly taste. she thought she knew him. baalzamon. but who were the
others? rand in that dry, dusty chamber again, with those small creatures
settling into his skin. rand confronting a horde of seanchan. rand
confronting her, and the women with her, and one of them was a seanchan. it
was all too confusing. she had to stop thinking about rand and the others and
put her mind to what was right ahead of her. what is the black ajah up to?
why dont i dream something about them? light, why cant i learn to make it
do what i want?
have the horses put ashore, captain, she told canin. i will tell mistress
maryim and mistress caryla. that was nynaevemaryimand elayne
caryla.
i have sent a man to tell them, mistress joslyn. and your animals will be
on the dock as soon as my men can rig a boom.
he sounded very pleased to be rid of them. she thought about telling him
not to hurry, but rejected it immediately. the darters corkscrewing might
have stopped, but she wanted dry land under her feet again. now. still, she
stopped to pat mists nose and let the gray mare nuzzle her palm, to let canin
see she was in no great rush.
nynaeve and elayne appeared at the ladder from the cabins, laden with
their bundles and saddlebags, and elayne almost as laden with nynaeve.
when nynaeve saw egwene watching, she pushed herself away from the
daughterheir and walked unaided the rest of the way to where men were
setting a narrow gangplank to the dock. two crewmen came to fasten a wide
canvas sling under mists belly, and egwene hurried below for her own
things. when she came back up, her mare was already on the dock and
elaynes roan dangled in the canvas sling halfway there.
for a moment after her feet were on the dock, all she felt was relief. this
would not pitch and roll. then she began to look at this city whose reaching
had caused them such pains.
stone warehouses backed the long docks themselves, and there seemed to
be a great many ships, large and small, alongside the docks or anchored in the
river. hastily she avoided looking at the ships. tear had been built on flat


 land, with barely a bump. down muddy dirt streets between the warehouses,
she could see houses and inns and taverns of wood and stone. their roofs of
slate or tile had oddly sharp corners, and some rose to a point. beyond these,
she could make out a high wall of dark gray stone, and behind it the tops of
towers with balconies high around them and whitedomed palaces. the domes
had a squared shape to them, and the tower tops looked pointed, like some of
the roofs outside the wall. all in all, tear was easily as big as caemlyn or tar
valon, and if not so beautiful as either, it was still one of the great cities. yet
she found it hard to look at anything but the stone of tear.
she had heard of it in stories, heard that it was the greatest fortress in the
world and the oldest, the first built after the breaking of the world, yet
nothing had prepared her for this sight. at first she thought it was a huge, gray
stone hill or a small, barren mountain covering hundreds of hides, its length
stretching from the erinin west through the wall and into the city. even after
she saw the huge banner flapping from its greatest heightthree white
crescent moons slanting across a field half red, half gold; a banner waving at
least three hundred paces above the river, yet large enough to be clearly seen
at that heighteven after she made out battlements and towers, it was
difficult to believe the stone of tear had been built rather than carved out of a
mountain already there.
made with the power, elayne murmured. she was staring at the stone,
too. flows of earth woven to draw stone from the ground, air to bring it
from every corner of the world, and earth and fire to make it all in one piece,
without seam or joint or mortar. atuan sedai says the tower could not do it,
today. strange, given how the high lords feel concerning the power now.
i think, nynaeve said softly, eyeing the dockmen moving around them,
that given that very thing, we should not mention certain other things aloud.
elayne appeared torn between indignationshe had spoken very softlyand
agreement; the daughterheir agreed with nynaeve too often and too readily
to suit egwene.
only when nynaeve is right, she admitted to herself grudgingly. a woman
who wore the ring, or was even associated with tar valon, would be watched
here. the barefoot, leathervested dockmen were not paying the three of them
any mind as they hurried about, carrying bales or crates on their backs as
often as on barrows. a strong odor of fish hung in the air; the next three docks
had dozens of small fishing boats clustered around them, just like those in the
drawing in the amyrlins study. shirtless men and barefoot women were
hoisting baskets of fish out of the boats, mounds of silver and bronze and


 green, and colors she had never suspected fish might be, such as bright red,
and deep blue, and brilliant yellow, some with stripes or splotches of white
and other colors.
she lowered her voice for elaynes ear alone. she is right, caryla.
remember why you are caryla. she did not want nynaeve to hear such
admissions. her face did not change when she heard, but egwene could feel
satisfaction radiating from her like heat from a cook stove.
nynaeves black stallion was just being lowered to the dock; sailors had
already carried their tack off the ship and simply dumped it on the wet stones
of the dock. nynaeve glanced at the horses and opened her mouthegwene
was sure it was to tell them to saddle their animalsthen closed it again,
tightlipped, as if it had cost her an effort. she gave her braid one hard tug.
before the sling was well out of the way, nynaeve tossed the bluestriped
saddle blanket across the blacks back and hoisted her highcantled saddle
atop it. she did not even look at the other two women.
egwene was not anxious to ride at that momentthe motion of a horse
might be too close to the motion of the darter for her stomachbut another
look at those muddy streets convinced her. her shoes were sturdy, but she
would not enjoy having to clean mud off them, or having to hold her skirts up
as she walked, either. she saddled mist quickly and climbed onto her back,
settling her skirts, before she could decide the mud might not be so bad after
all. a little needlework on the darterelayne had done it all, this time; the
daughterheir sewed a very fine stitchhad divided all their dresses nicely
for riding astride.
nynaeves face paled for a moment when she swung into her saddle and the
stallion decided to frisk. she kept a tightmouthed grip on herself and a firm
hand on her reins and soon had him under control. by the time they had
ridden slowly past the warehouses, she could speak. we need to locate
liandrin and the others without them learning we are asking after them. they
surely know we are comingthat someone is, at leastbut i would like them
not to know we are here until it is too late for them. she drew a deep breath.
i confess i have not thought of any way to do this. yet. do either of you have
any suggestions?
a thieftaker, elayne said without hesitation. nynaeve frowned at her.
you mean like hurin? egwene said. but hurin was in the service of his
king. wouldnt any thieftaker here serve the high lords?
elayne nodded, and for a moment egwene envied the daughterheir her


 stomach. yes, they would. but thieftakers are not like the queens guards,
or the tairen defenders of the stone. they serve the ruler, but people who
have been robbed sometimes pay them to retrieve what was stolen. and they
also sometimes take money to find people. at least, they do in caemlyn. i
cannot think it is different here in tear.
then we take rooms at an inn, egwene said, and ask the innkeeper to
find us a thieftaker.
not an inn, nynaeve said as firmly as she guided the stallion; she never
seemed to let the animal get out of her control. after a moment she moderated
her tone a little. liandrin, at least, knows us, and we have to assume the
others do, too. they will surely be watching the inns for whoever followed
the trail they sprinkled behind them. i mean to spring their trap in their faces,
but not with us inside. well not stay at an inn.
egwene refused to give her the satisfaction of asking.
where then? elaynes brow furrowed. if i made myself knownand
could make anyone believe it, in these clothes and with no escortwe would
be welcomed by most of the noble houses, and very likely in the stone itself
there are good relations between caemlyn and tearbut there would be no
keeping it quiet. the entire city would know before nightfall. i cannot think of
anywhere else except an inn, nynaeve. unless you mean to go out to a farm
in the country, but we will never find them from the country.
nynaeve glanced at egwene. i will know when i see it. let me look.
elaynes frown swept from nynaeve to egwene and back again.  do not
cut off your ears because you do not like your earrings,  she muttered.
egwene put her attention firmly on the street they were riding along. i will
be burned if ill let her think i am even wondering!
there were not a great many people out, not compared to the streets of tar
valon. perhaps the thick mud in the street discouraged them. carts and
wagons lurched past, most pulled by oxen with wide horns, the carter or
wagoneer walking alongside with a long goad of some pale, ridged wood. no
carriages or sedan chairs used these streets. the odor of fish hung in the air
here, too, and no few of the men who hurried past carried huge baskets full of
fish on their backs. the shops did not look prosperous; none displayed wares
outside, and egwene seldom saw anyone go in. the shops had signsthe
tailors needle and bolt of cloth, the cutlers knife and scissors, the weavers
loom, and the likebut the paint on most of them was peeling. the few inns
had signs in as bad a state, and looked no busier. the small houses crowded


 between inns and shops often had tiles or slates missing from their roofs. this
part of tear, at least, was poor. and from what she saw on the faces, few of
the people here cared to try any longer. they were moving, working, but most
of them had given up. few as much as glanced at three women riding where
everyone else walked.
the men wore baggy breeches, usually tied at the ankle. only a handful
wore coats, long, dark garments that fit arms and chest tightly, then became
looser below the waist. there were more men in low shoes than in boots, but
most went barefoot in the mud. a good many wore no coat or shirt at all, and
had their breeches held up by a broad sash, sometimes colored and often dirty.
some had wide, conical straw hats on their heads, and a few, cloth caps that
sagged down one side of the face. the womens dresses had high necks, right
up to their chins, and hems that stopped at the ankle. many had short aprons
in pale colors, sometimes two or three, each smaller than the one beneath it,
and most wore the same straw hats as the men, but dyed to complement the
aprons.
it was on a woman that she first saw how those who wore shoes dealt with
the mud. the woman had small wooden platforms tied to the soles of her
shoes, lifting them two hands out of the mud; she walked along as if her feet
were planted firmly on the ground. egwene saw others wearing the platforms
after that, men as well as women. some of the women went barefoot, but not
as many as the men.
she was wondering which shop might sell those platforms, when nynaeve
suddenly turned her black down an alleyway between a long, narrow twostory house and a stonewalled potters shop. egwene exchanged glances with
elaynethe daughterheir shruggedand then they followed. egwene did
not know where nynaeve was going or whyand she meant to have words
with her about itbut she did not mean to become separated, either.
the alley suddenly let into a small yard behind the house, fenced in by the
buildings around it. nynaeve had already dismounted and tied her reins to a
fig tree, where the stallion could not reach the green things sprouting in a
vegetable patch that took up half the yard. a line of stones had been laid to
make a path to the back door. nynaeve strode to the door and knocked.
what is it? egwene demanded in spite of herself. why are we stopping
here?
did you not see the herbs in the front windows? nynaeve knocked again.
herbs? elayne said.


 a wisdom, egwene told her as she got down from her saddle and tied
mist alongside the black. gaidin is no good name for a horse. does she think
i dont know who she means it for? nynaeve has found herself a wisdom, or
seeker, or whatever they call her here.
a woman opened the door just enough to look out suspiciously. at first
egwene thought she was stout, but then the woman opened the door the rest
of the way. she was certainly well padded, but the way she moved spoke of
muscle underneath. she looked as strong as mistress luhhan, and some in
emonds field claimed alsbet luhhan was almost as strong as her husband. it
was not true, but it was not far wrong.
how can i help you? the woman said in an accent like the amyrlins. her
gray hair was arranged in thick curls that hung down the sides of her head,
and her three aprons were in shades of green, each slightly darker than the one
below, but even the topmost pale. which one of you needs me?
i do, nynaeve said. i need something for a queasy stomach. and
perhaps one of my companions does, too. that is, if weve come to the right
place?
youre not tairen, the woman said. i should have known that by your
clothes, before you spoke. im called mother guenna. i am called a wise
woman, too, but im old enough not to trust that to caulk a seam. you come,
and i will give you something for your stomach.
it was a neat kitchen, though not large, with copper pots hanging on the
wall, and dried herbs and sausages from the ceiling. several tall cupboards of
pale wood had doors carved with some sort of tall grass. the table had been
scrubbed almost white, and the backs of the chairs were carved with flowers.
a pot of fishysmelling soup was simmering atop the stone stove, and a kettle
with a spout, just beginning to steam. there was no fire on the stone hearth,
for which egwene was more than grateful; the stove added enough to the
heat, though mother guenna seemed not to notice it at all. dishes lined the
mantel, and more were stacked neatly on shelves to either side. the floor
looked as if it had just been swept.
mother guenna closed the door after them, and as she was crossing the
kitchen to her cupboards, nynaeve said, which tea will you give me?
chainleaf? or bluewort?
i would if i had any of either. mother guenna rooted in the shelves a
moment and came out with a stone jar. since ive had no time to glean of
late, i will give you a brew of marshwhite leaves.


 i am not familiar with that, nynaeve said slowly.
it works as well as chainleaf, but it has a bite to the taste some dont care
for. the big woman sprinkled dried and broken leaves into a blue teapot and
carried it over to the fireplace to add hot water. do you follow the craft,
then? sit. she gestured to the table with a hand holding two blueglazed cups
she had taken from the mantel. sit, and well talk. which one of you has the
other stomach?
i am fine, egwene said casually as she took a chair. are you queasy,
caryla? the daughterheir shook her head with perhaps a touch of
exasperation.
no matter. the grayhaired woman poured out a cup of dark liquid for
nynaeve, then sat across the table from her. i made enough for two, but
marshwhite tea keeps longer than salted fish. it works better the longer it sits,
too, but it also grows more bitter. makes a race between how much you need
your stomach settled and what your tongue can stand. drink, girl. after a
moment, she filled the second cup and took a sip. you see? it will not hurt
you.
nynaeve raised her own cup, making a small sound of displeasure at the
first taste. when she lowered the cup again, though, her face was smooth. it
is just a little bitter perhaps. tell me, mother guenna, will we have to put up
with this rain and mud much longer?
the older woman frowned, parceling displeasure among the three of them
before she settled on nynaeve. i am not a sea folk windfinder, girl, she
said quietly. if i could tell the weather, id sooner stick live silverpike down
my dress than admit it. the defenders take that sort of thing for next to aes
sedai work. now, do you follow the craft or not? you look as if you have
been traveling. what is good for fatigue? she barked suddenly.
flatwort tea, nynaeve said calmly, or andilay root. since you ask
questions, what would you do to ease birthing?
mother guenna snorted. apply warm towels, child, and perhaps give her a
little whitefennel if it was an especially hard birth. a woman needs no more
than that, and a soothing hand. cant you think of a question any country
farmwife could not answer? what do you give for pains in the heart? the
killing kind.
powdered gheandin blossom on the tongue, nynaeve said crisply. if a
woman has biting pains in her belly and spits up blood, what do you do?


 they settled down as if testing each other, tossing questions and answers
back and forth faster and faster. sometimes the questioning lagged a moment
when one spoke of a plant the other knew only by another name, but they
picked up speed again, arguing the merits of tinctures against teas, salves
against poultices, and when one was better than another. slowly, all the quick
questions began shifting toward the herbs and roots one knew that the other
did not, digging for knowledge. egwene began to grow irritable listening.
after you give him the boneknit, mother guenna was saying, you wrap
the broken limb in toweling soaked in water where youve boiled blue
goatflowersonly the blue, mind!nynaeve nodded impatientlyand as
hot as he can stand it. one part blue goatflowers to ten of water, no weaker.
replace the towels as soon as they stop steaming, and keep it up all day. the
bone will knit twice as fast as with boneknit alone, and twice as strong.
i will remember that, nynaeve said. you mentioned using sheepstongue
root for eye pain. ive never heard
egwene could stand it no longer. maryim, she broke in, do you really
believe youll ever need to know these things again? you are not a wisdom
any longer, or have you forgotten?
i have not forgotten anything, nynaeve said sharply. i remember a time
when you were as eager to learn new things as i am.
mother guenna, elayne said blandly, what do you do for two women
who cannot stop arguing?
the grayhaired woman pursed her lips and frowned at the table. usually,
men or women, i tell them to stay away from each other. that is the best
thing, and the easiest.
usually? elayne said. what if there is a reason they cannot stay apart.
say they are sisters.
i do have a way to make an arguer stop, the big woman said slowly. it is
not something i urge anyone to try, but some do come to me. egwene
thought there was a suspicion of a smile at the corners of her mouth. i charge
a silver mark each for women. two for men, because men make more fuss.
there are some will buy anything, if it costs enough.
but what is the cure? elayne asked.
i tell them they have to bring the other one here with them, the one they
argue with. both expect me to quiet the others tongue. despite herself,
egwene was listening. she noticed nynaeve seemed to be paying sharp


 attention, as well. when they have paid me, mother guenna continued,
flexing one hefty arm, i take them out back and stick their heads in my rain
barrel till they agree to stop their arguing.
elayne burst out laughing.
i think i may have done something very like that myself, nynaeve said in
a voice that was much too light. egwene hoped her own expression looked
nothing like nynaeves.
id not be surprised if you have. mother guenna was grinning openly
now. i tell them the next time i hear theyve been arguing, i will do it for
free, but ill use the river. it is remarkable how often the cure works, for men
especially. and it is remarkable what it has done for my reputation. for some
reason, none of the people i cure this way ever tells anyone else the details, so
someone asks for the cure every few months. if youve been fool enough to
eat mudfish, you do not go around telling people. i trust none of you have any
wish to spend a silver mark.
i think not, egwene said, and glared at elayne when she went off in peals
of laughter again.
good, the grayhaired woman said. those i cure of arguing have a
tendency to avoid me like stingweed caught in their nets, unless they actually
take sick, and i am enjoying your company. most of those who come at
present want something to take away bad dreams, and they grow sour when i
have nothing to give them. for a moment she slipped into a frown, rubbing
her temples. it is good to see three faces that do not look as if there is
nothing left but to jump over the side and drown. if you are staying long in
tear, you must come see me again. the girl called you maryim? i am ailhuin.
the next time, well talk over some good sea folk tea instead of something
that curdles your tongue. light, but i hate the taste of marshwhite; mudfish
would taste sweeter. in fact, if you have time to stay now, ill brew a pot of
tremalking black. not long till supper, either. its just bread and soup and
cheese, but you are welcome.
that would be very nice, ailhuin, nynaeve said. actually. . . . ailhuin,
if you have a spare bedroom, id like to hire it for the three of us.
the big woman looked at each of them without saying anything. getting to
her feet, she tucked the pot of marshwhite tea away in the herb cupboard, then
fetched a red teapot and a pouch from another. only when she had brewed a
pot of tremalking black, put four clean cups and a bowl of honeycomb on the
table along with pewter spoons, and reclaimed her chair did she speak.


 ive three empty bedrooms upstairs, now my daughters are all married.
my husband, the light shine on him, was lost in a storm in the fingers of the
dragon near twenty years ago. there need be no talk of hiring, if i decide to
let you have the rooms. if, maryim. stirring honey into her tea, she studied
them again.
what will make you decide? nynaeve asked quietly.
ailhuin continued to stir, as if she had forgotten to drink. three young
women, riding fine horses. i dont know much about horses, but those look as
fine as what the lords and ladies ride, to me. you, maryim, know enough of
the craft that you ought to have hung herbs in your window already, or should
be choosing where to do it. ive never heard of a woman practicing the craft
too far from where she was born, but by your tongue, you are a long way.
she glanced at elayne. not many places with hair that color. andor, id say,
by your speech. fool men are always talking about finding a yellowhaired
andor girl. what i want to know is why? running away from something? or
running after something? only, you dont look like thieves to me, and i never
heard of three women chasing after a man together. so tell me why, and if i
like it, the rooms are yours. if you want to pay something, you buy a bit of
meat now and then. meat is dear since the trade up to cairhien fell away. but
first the why, maryim.
we are chasing after something, ailhuin, nynaeve said. or rather, after
some people. egwene schooled herself to stillness and hoped she was doing
as well as elayne, who was sipping her tea as if she were listening to talk
about dresses. egwene did not believe ailhuin guennas dark eyes missed a
great deal. they stole some things, ailhuin, nynaeve went on. from my
mother. and they did murder. we are here to see justice done.
burn my soul, the large woman said, have you no menfolk? men are not
good for much beyond heavy hauling and getting in the way, most of the time
and kissing and suchbut if theres a battle to be fought or a thief to catch,
i say let them do it. andor is as civilized as tear. you are not aiel.
there was no one else but us, nynaeve said. those who might have
come in our place were killed.
the three murdered aes sedai, egwene thought. they could not have been
black ajah. but if they had not been killed, the amyrlin would not have been
able to trust them. shes trying to keep to the bloody three oaths, but she is
skirting it close.
aaah, ailhuin said sadly. they killed your men? brothers, or husbands,


 or fathers? spots of color bloomed in nynaeves cheeks, and the older
woman mistook the emotion. no, dont tell me, girl. ill not pull up old grief.
let it lie on the bottom till it melts away. there, there, you calm yourself. it
was an effort for egwene not to growl with disgust.
i must tell you this, nynaeve said in a stiff voice. the red still colored
her face. these murderers and thieves are darkfriends. they are women, but
they are as dangerous as any swordsman, ailhuin. if you wondered why we
did not seek an inn, that is why. they may know we follow, and they may be
watching for us.
ailhuin waved it all away with a sniff. of the four most dangerous folk i
know, two are women who never carry as much as a knife, and only one of
the men is a swordsman. as for darkfriends. . . . maryim, when you are as
old as i, youll learn that false dragons are dangerous, lionfish are dangerous,
sharks are dangerous, and sudden storms out of the south; but darkfriends are
fools. filthy fools, but fools. the dark one is locked up where the creator
put him, and no fetches or fangfish to scare children will get him out. fools
dont frighten me unless theyre working the boat im riding. i suppose you
dont have any proof you could take to the defenders of the stone? it would
be just your word against theirs?
what is a fetch? egwene wondered. or a fangfish, for that matter.
we will have proof when we find them, nynaeve said. they will have
the things they stole, and we can describe them. they are old things, and of
little value to anyone but us, and our friends.
you would be surprised what old things can be worth, ailhuin said dryly.
old leuese mulan pulled up three heartstone bowls and a cup in his nets last
year, down in the fingers of the dragon. now, instead of a fishing smack, he
owns a ship trading up the river. old fool did not even know what he had till i
told him. very likely theres more right where those came from, but leuese
couldnt even remember the exact spot. i do not know how he ever managed
to get a fish into his net. half the fishing boats in tear were down there for
months afterwards, dragging for cuendillar, not grunts or flatfish, and some
had lords saying where to pull the nets. thats what old things can be worth, if
they are old enough. now, ive decided you do need a man in this, and i know
just the one.
who? nynaeve said quickly. if you mean a lord, one of the high lords,
remember we have no proof to offer till we find them.
ailhuin laughed until she wheezed. girl, nobody from the maule knows a


 high lord, or any kind of lord. mudfish dont school with silversides. i will
bring you the dangerous man i know who isnt a swordsman, and the more
dangerous of the two, at that. juilin sandar is a thiefcatcher. the best of
them. i do not know how it is in andor, but here a thiefcatcher will work for
you or me as soon as for a lord or a merchant, and charge less at that. juilin
can find these women for you if they can be found, and bring your things
back without you having to go near these darkfriends.
nynaeve agreed as if she were still not entirely sure, and ailhuin tied those
platforms to her shoesclogs, she called themand hurried out. egwene
watched her go, through one of the kitchen windows, past the horses and
around the corner up the alley.
you are learning how to be aes sedai, maryim, she said as she turned
from the window. you manipulate people as well as moiraine. nynaeves
face went white.
elayne stalked across the floor and slapped egwenes face. egwene was so
shocked she could only stare. you go too far, the goldenhaired woman said
sharply. too far. we must live together, or we will surely die together! did
you give ailhuin your true name? nynaeve told her what we could, that we
seek darkfriends, and that was risk enough, linking us with darkfriends. she
told her they were dangerous, murderers. would you have had her say they
are black ajah? in tear? would you risk everything on whether ailhuin
would keep that to herself?
egwene rubbed her cheek gingerly. elayne had a strong arm. i do not have
to like doing it.
i know, elayne sighed. neither do i. but we do have to.
egwene turned back to peering through the window at the horses. i know
we do. but i do not have to like it.


 c h a p t e r
4 9


a storm in tear


egwene finally returned to the table and her tea. she thought perhaps elayne
was right, that she had gone too far, but she could not bring herself to
apologize, and they sat in silence.
when ailhuin returned, she had a man with her, a lean fellow in his middle
years who looked as if he had been carved from aged wood. juilin sandar
took off his clogs by the door and hung his flat, conical straw hat on a peg. a
swordbreaker, much like hurins but with short slots to either side of the long
one, hung from a belt over his brown coat, and he carried a staff exactly as tall
as he was, but not much thicker than his thumb and made of that pale wood,
like ridged joints, that the oxdrivers used for their goads. his shortcut black
hair lay flat on his head, and his quick, dark eyes seemed to note and record
every detail of the room. and of everyone in it. egwene would have bet he
examined nynaeve twice, and to her, at least, nynaeves lack of reaction was
blatant; it was obvious she knew it, too.
ailhuin motioned him to a place at the table, where he turned back the
cuffs of his coat sleeves, bowed to each of them in turn, and sat with his staff
propped against his shoulder, not speaking until the grayhaired woman had
made a fresh pot of tea and everyone had sipped from their cups.
mother guenna has told me of your problem, he said quietly as he set his
cup down. i will help you if i can, but the high lords may have their own
business to put me to, soon.
the big woman snorted. juilin, when did you begin haggling like a
shopkeeper trying to charge silk prices for linen? do not claim you know
when the high lords will summon you before they do.


 i wont claim it, sandar told her with a smile, but i know when ive
seen men on the rooftops in the night. just out of the corner of my eyethey
can hide like pipefish in reedsbut i have seen the movement. no one has
reported a theft yet, but there are thieves working inside the walls, and you
can buy your supper with that. mark me. before another week, ill be
summoned to the stone because a band of thieves is breaking into merchants
houses, or even lords manors. the defenders may guard the streets, but when
thieves need tracking they send for a thiefcatcher, and me before any other. i
am not trying to drive up my price, but whatever i do for these pretty women,
i must do soon.
i believe he speaks the truth, ailhuin said reluctantly. hell tell you the
moon is green and water white if he thinks it will bring him a kiss, but he lies
less than most men about other things. he may be the most honest man ever
born in the maule. elayne put a hand over her mouth, and egwene struggled
not to laugh. nynaeve sat unmoved and obviously impatient.
sandar grimaced at the grayhaired woman, then apparently decided to
ignore what she had said. he smiled at nynaeve. i will admit that im
curious about these thieves. ive known women thieves, and bands of thieves,
but i never heard of a band of women thieves before. and i owe mother
guenna favors. his eyes seemed to record nynaeve all over again.
what do you charge? she asked sharply.
to recover stolen goods, he said briskly, i ask the tenth part of the value
of what i recover. for finding someone, i ask a silver mark for each person.
mother guenna says the things stolen have little value except to you,
mistress, so i suggest you take that choice. he smiled again; he had very
white teeth. i would not take money from you at all, except that the
brotherhood would frown on it, but i will take as little as i can. a copper or
two, no more.
i know a thieftaker, elayne told him. from shienar. a very respectful
man. he carries a sword as well as a swordbreaker. why do you not?
sandar looked startled for a moment, and then upset with himself for being
startled. he had not caught her hint, or else had decided to ignore it. you are
not tairen. i have heard of shienar, mistress, tales of trollocs, and every man
a warrior. his smile said these were tales for children.
true stories, egwene said. or true enough. i have been to shienar.
he blinked at her, and went on. i am not a lord, nor a wealthy merchant,
nor even a soldier. the defenders do not trouble foreigners much for carrying


 swordsunless they mean to stay long, of coursebut i would be thrust into
a cell under the stone. there are laws, mistress. his hand rubbed along his
staff, as if unconsciously. i do as well as may be, without a sword. he
focused his smile on nynaeve once more. now, if you will describe these
things
he stopped as she set her purse on the edge of the table and counted out
thirteen silver marks. egwene thought she had chosen the lightest coins; most
were tairen, only one andoran. the amyrlin had given them a great deal of
gold, but even that would not last forever.
nynaeve looked into the purse thoughtfully before tightening the strings
and putting it back into her pouch. there are thirteen women for you to find,
master sandar, with as much silver again when you do. find them, and we
will recover our property ourselves.
i will do that myself for less than this, he protested. and theres no need
for extra rewards. i charge what i charge. have no fear ill take a bribe.
there is no fear of that, ailhuin agreed. i said he is honest. just do not
believe him if he says he loves you. sandar glared at her.
i pay the coin, master sandar, nynaeve said firmly, so i choose what i
am buying. will you find these women, and no more? she waited for him to
nod, reluctantly, before going on. they may be together, or not. the first is a
taraboner. she is a little taller than i, with dark eyes and pale, honeycolored
hair that she wears in many small braids after the tarabon fashion. some men
might think her pretty, but she would not consider it a compliment. she has a
mean, sulky mouth. the second is kandori. she has long black hair with a
white streak above her left ear, and. . . .
she gave no names, and sandar asked for none. names were so easily
changed. his smile was gone now that the business was at hand. thirteen
women she described as he listened intently, and when she was done, egwene
was sure he could have recited them back word for word.
mother guenna may have told you this, nynaeve finished, but i will
repeat it. these women are more dangerous than you can believe. over a
dozen have died at their hands already, that i know of, and i would not be
surprised if that was only a drop of the blood on their hands. sandar and
ailhuin both blinked at that. if they discover you are asking after them, you
will die. if they take you, they will make you tell where we are, and mother
guenna will probably die with us. the grayhaired woman looked
disbelieving. believe it! nynaeves stare demanded agreement. believe it,


 or ill take back the silver and find another with more brains!
when i was young, sandar said, voice serious, a cutpurse put her knife
in my ribs because i thought a pretty young girl wouldnt be as quick to stab
as a man. i do not make that mistake anymore. i will behave as if these
women are all aes sedai, and black ajah. egwene almost choked, and he
gave her a rueful grin as he scooped the coins into his own purse and stuck it
behind his sash. i did not mean to frighten you, mistress. there are no aes
sedai in tear. it may take a few days, unless they are together. thirteen
women together will be easy to find; apart, they will be harder. but either
way, i will find them. and i will not frighten them away before you learn
where they are.
when he had donned his straw hat and clogs and departed by the back
door, elayne said, i hope he is not overconfident. ailhuin, i heard what he
said but. . . . he does understand that they are dangerous, does he not?
he has never been a fool except for a pair of eyes or a pretty ankle, the
grayhaired woman said, and that is a failing of every man. he is the best
thiefcatcher in tear. have no worry. he will find these darkfriends of
yours.
it will rain again before morning. nynaeve shivered, despite the warmth
of the room. i feel a storm gathering. ailhuin only shook her head and set
about filling bowls with fish soup for supper.
after they ate and cleaned up, nynaeve and ailhuin sat at the table talking
of herbs and cures. elayne worked on a small patch of embroidery she had
begun on the shoulder of her cloak, tiny blue and white flowers, then read in a
copy of the essays of willim of maneches that ailhuin had on her small shelf
of books. egwene tried reading, but neither the essays, nor the travels of
jain farstrider, nor the humorous tales of aleria elffin could hold her
interest for more than a few pages. she fingered the stone terangreal through
the bosom of her dress. where are they? what do they want in the heart?
none but the dragonnone but randcan touch callandor, so what do they
want? what? what?
as night deepened, ailhuin showed them each to a bedroom on the second
floor, but after she had gone to her own, they gathered in egwenes by the
light of a single lamp. egwene had already undressed to her shift; the cord
hung round her neck with the two rings. the striped stone felt far heavier
than the gold. this was what they had done every night since leaving tar
valon, with the sole exception of that night with the aiel.


 wake me after an hour, she told them.
elayne frowned. so short, this time?
do you feel uneasy? nynaeve said. perhaps you are using it too often.
we would still be in tar valon scrubbing pots and hoping to find a black
sister before a gray man found us if i had not, egwene said sharply. light,
elaynes right. i am snapping like a sulky child. she took a deep breath.
perhaps i am uneasy. maybe it is because we are so close to the heart of the
stone, now. so close to callandor. so close to the trap, whatever it is.
be careful, elayne said, and nynaeve said, more quietly, be very
careful, egwene. please. she was tugging her braid in short jerks.
as egwene lay down on the lowposted bed, with them on stools to either
side, thunder rolled across the sky. sleep came slowly.
it was the rolling hills again, as always at first, flowers and butterflies under
spring sunshine, soft breezes and birds singing. she wore green silk, this time,
with golden birds embroidered over her breasts, and green velvet slippers.
the terangreal seemed light enough to drift up out of her dress except for the
weight of the great serpent ring holding it down.
by simple trial and error she had learned a little of the rules of
telaranrhiodeven this world of dreams, this unseen world, had its rules,
if odd ones; she was sure she did not know a tenth of themand one way to
make herself go where she wanted. closing her eyes, she emptied her mind as
she would have to embrace saidar. it was not as easy, because the rosebud
kept trying to form, and she kept sensing the true source, kept aching to
embrace it, but she had to fill the emptiness with something else. she pictured
the heart of the stone, as she had seen it in these dreams, formed it in every
detail, perfect within the void. the huge, polished redstone columns. the ageworn stones of the floor. the dome, far overhead. the crystal sword,
untouchable, slowly revolving hiltdown in midair. when it was so real she
was sure she could reach out and touch it, she opened her eyes, and she was
there, in the heart of the stone. or the heart of the stone as it existed in
telaranrhiod.
the columns were there, and callandor. and around the sparkling sword,
almost as dim and insubstantial as shadows, thirteen women sat crosslegged,
staring at callandor as it revolved. honeyhaired liandrin turned her head,
looking straight at egwene with those big, dark eyes, and her rosebud mouth


 smiled.
gasping, egwene sat up in bed so fast she almost fell off the side.
what is the matter? elayne demanded. what happened? you look
frightened.
you only just closed your eyes, nynaeve said softly. this is the first
time since the very beginning that youve come back without us waking you.
something did happen, didnt it? she tugged her braid sharply. are you all
right?
how did i get back? egwene wondered. light, i do not even know what i
did. she knew she was only trying to put off what she had to say. unfastening
the cord around her neck, she held the great serpent ring and the larger,
twisted terangreal on her palm. they are waiting for us, she said finally.
there was no need to say who. and i think they know we are in tear.
outside, the storm broke over the city.
rain drumming on the deck over his head, mat stared at the stones board on
the table between him and thom, but he could not really concentrate on the
game, even with an andoran silver mark riding on the outcome. thunder
crashed, and lightning flashed in the small windows. four lamps lit the
captains cabin of the swift. bloody ship may be as sleek as the bird, but its
still taking too bloody long. the vessel gave a small jolt, then another; the
motion seemed to change. he had better not run us into the bloody mud! if he
is not making the best time he can wring out of this buttertub, i will stuff that
gold down his throat! yawninghe had not slept well since leaving caemlyn;
he could not stop worrying enough to sleep wellyawning, he set a white
stone on the intersection of two lines; in three moves, he would capture nearly
a fifth of thoms black stones.
you could be a good player, boy, the gleeman said around his pipe,
placing his next stone, if you put your mind to it. his tabac smelled like
leaves and nuts.
mat reached for another stone from the pile at his elbow, then blinked and
let it lie. in the same three moves, thoms stones would surround over a third
of his. he had not seen it coming, and he could see no escape. do you ever
lose a game? have you ever lost a game?


 thom removed his pipe and knuckled his mustaches. not in a long while.
morgase used to beat me about half the time. it is said good commanders of
soldiers and good players of the great game are good at stones, as well. she
is the one, and ive no doubt she could command a battle, too.
wouldnt you rather dice some more? stones take too much time.
i like a chance to win more than one toss in nine or ten, the whitehaired
man said dryly.
mat bounded to his feet as the door banged open to admit captain derne.
the squarefaced man whipped his cloak from his shoulders, shaking the rain
off and muttering curses to himself. the light sear my bones, i do not know
why i ever let you hire swift. you, demanding more flaming speed in the
blackest night or the heaviest rain. more speed. always more bloody speed!
could have run on a bloody mudflat a hundred times over by now!
you wanted the gold, mat said harshly. you said this heap of old boards
was fast, derne. when do we reach tear?
the captain smiled a tight smile. we are tying off to the dock, now. and
burn me for a bloody farmer if i carry anything that can flaming talk ever
again! now, where is the rest of my gold?
mat hurried to one of the small windows and peered out. in the harsh glare
of lightning flashes he could see a wet stone dock, if not much else. he fished
the second purse of gold from his pocket and tossed it to derne. whoever
heard of a riverman who didnt dice! about time, he growled. light send
im not too late.
he had stuffed all of his spare clothes and his blankets into the leather
scrip, and he hung that on one side of him and the roll of fireworks on the
other, from the cord he tied to it. his cloak covered it all, but gapped a little in
the front. better he got wet than the fireworks. he could dry out and be as
good as new; a test with a bucket had shown fireworks could not. i guess
rands da was right. mat had always thought the village council would not
set them off in the rain because they made a better show on clear nights.
arent you about ready to sell those things? thom was settling his
gleemans cloak on his shoulders. it covered his leathercased harp and flute,
but his bundle of clothes and blankets he slung on his back outside the patchcovered cloak.
not until i figure out how they work, thom. besides, think what fun it
will be when i set them all off.


 the gleeman shuddered. as long as you dont do it all at once, boy. as
long as you dont throw them in the fireplace at supper. id not put it past you,
the way youve been behaving with them. youre lucky the captain here did
not throw us off the ship two days ago.
he wouldnt. mat laughed. not while that purse was in the offing. eh,
derne?
derne was tossing the purse of gold in his hand. i have not asked before
this, but youve given me the gold, now, and youll not take it back. what is
this all about? all this flaming speed.
a wager, derne. yawning, mat picked up his quarterstaff, ready to go. a
wager.
a wager! derne stared at the heavy purse. the other just like it was
locked in his money chest. there must be a flaming kingdom riding on it!
more than that, mat said.
rain bucketed down on the deck so hard that he could not see the
gangplank except when lightning crackled above the city; the roar of the
downpour barely let him hear himself think. he could see lights in windows
up a street, though. there would be inns, up there. the captain had not come
on deck to see them ashore, and none of the crew had stayed out in the rain,
either. mat and thom made their way to the stone dock alone.
mat cursed when his boots sank into the mud of the street, but there was
nothing for it, so he kept on, striding along as fast as he could with his boots
and the butt of his staff sticking at every step. the air smelled of fish, rank
even with the rain. well find an inn, he said, loudly, so he could be heard,
and then i will go out looking.
in this weather? thom shouted back. rain was rolling down his face, but
he was more interested in keeping his instruments covered than his face.
comar could have left caemlyn before us. if he had a good horse instead
of the crowbaits we were riding, he could have set out downriver from
aringill maybe a full day ahead of us, and i dont know how much of that we
caught up with that idiot derne.
it was a quick passage, thom allowed. swift deserves its name.
be that as it may, thom, rain or no rain, i have to find him before he finds
egwene and nynaeve, and elayne.
a few more hours wont make much difference, boy. there are hundreds


 of inns in a city the size of tear. there may be hundreds more outside the
walls, some of them little places with no more than a dozen rooms to let, so
tiny you could walk right by them and never know they were there. the
gleeman hitched the hood of his cloak up more, muttering to himself. it will
take weeks to search them all. but it will take comar the same weeks. we can
spend the night in out of the rain. you can wager whatever coin you have left
that comar wont be out in it.
mat shook his head. a tiny inn with a dozen rooms. before he left emonds
field, the biggest building he had ever seen was the winespring inn. he
doubted if bran alvere had any more than a dozen rooms to let. egwene had
lived with her parents and her sisters in the rooms at the front of the second
floor. burn me, sometimes i think we should never any of us have left emonds
field. but rand surely had had to, and egwene would probably have died if
she had not gone to tar valon. now she might die because she did go. he did
not think he could settle for the farm again; the cows and the sheep certainly
would not play dice. but perrin still had a chance to go home. go home,
perrin, he found himself thinking. go home while you still can. he gave
himself a shake. fool! why would he want to? he thought of bed, but pushed
it away. not yet.
lightning streaked across the sky, three jagged bolts together, casting a
stark light over a narrow house that seemed to have bunches of herbs hanging
in the windows, and a shop, shut up tight, but a potters from the sign with its
bowls and plates. yawning, he hunched his shoulders against the driving rain
and tried to pull his boots out of the clinging mud more quickly.
i think i can forget about this part of the city, thom, he shouted. all this
mud, and that stink of fish. can you see nynaeve or egweneor elayne!
choosing to stay here? women like things neat and tidy, thom, and smelling
good.
may be, boy, thom muttered, then coughed. you would be surprised
what women will put up with. but it may be.
holding his cloak to keep the roll of fireworks covered, mat lengthened his
stride. come on, thom. i want to find comar or the girls tonight, one or the
other.
thom limped after him, coughing now and again.
they strode through the wide gates in the cityunguarded, in the rain
and mat was relieved to feel paving stones under his feet again. and not more
than fifty paces up the street was an inn, the windows of the common room


 spilling light onto the street, music drifting out into the night. even thom
covered that last fifty paces through the rain quickly, limp or no limp.
the white crescent had a landlord whose girth made his long blue coat fit
snugly below the waist as well as above, unlike those of most of the men in
the lowbacked chairs at the tables. mat thought the landlords baggy
breeches, tied at the ankle above low shoes, had to be big enough for two
ordinary men to fit inside, one in each leg. the serving women wore dark,
highnecked dresses and short white aprons. there was a fellow playing a
hammered dulcimer between the two stone fireplaces. thom eyed the fellow
critically and shook his head. the rotund innkeeper, cavan lopar by name,
was more than glad to give them rooms. he frowned at their muddy boots, but
silver from mats pocketthe gold was running lowand thoms patchcovered cloak smoothed his fat forehead. when thom said he would perform
for a small fee some nights, lopars chins waggled with pleasure. of a big
man with a white streak in his beard, he knew nothing, nor of three women
meeting the descriptions mat gave. mat left everything but his cloak and his
quarterstaff in his room, barely looking to see that it had a bedsleep was
enticing, but he refused to let himself think of itthen wolfed down a spicy
fish stew and rushed back out into the rain. he was surprised that thom came
with him.
i thought you wanted to be in where its dry, thom.
the gleeman patted the flute case he still had under his cloak. the rest of
his things were up in his room. people talk to a gleeman, boy. i may learn
something you would not. id not like to see those girls harmed any more than
you.
there was another inn a hundred paces down the rainfilled street on the
other side, and another two hundred beyond that, and then more. mat took
them as he came to them, ducking in long enough for thom to flourish his
cloak and tell a story, then let someone buy him a cup of wine afterwards
while mat asked around after a tall man with a white streak in his closecut
black beard and three women. he won a few coins at dice, but he learned
nothing, and neither did thom. he was just glad the gleeman seemed to be
taking only a few sips of wine at each inn; thom had been close to
abstemious on the boat, but mat had not been certain he would not dive back
into the wine once they reached tear. by the time they had visited two dozen
common rooms, mat felt as if his eyelids had weights. the rain had lessened a
bit, but it still fell steadily in big drops, and as the rain fell off the wind had
freshened. the sky had the dark gray look of coming dawn.


 boy, thom muttered, if we dont go back to the white crescent, i am
going to go to sleep here in the rain. he stopped to cough. do you realize
youve marched right past three inns? light, i am so tired i cant think. do
you have a scheme of where to go that you have not told me?
mat stared blearily up the street at a tall man in a cloak hurrying around a
corner. light, i am tired. rand is five hundred leagues from here, playing at
being the bloody dragon. what? three inns? they were standing almost in
front of another, the golden cup according to the sign creaking in the wind.
it looked nothing like a dice cup, but he decided to give it a try anyway. one
more, thom. if we dont find them here, well go back and go to bed. bed
sounded better than a dice game with a hundred gold marks riding on the toss,
but he made himself go in.
two steps into the common room mat saw him. the big man wore a green
coat with blue stripes down puffy sleeves, but it was comar, closecut black
beard with a white streak over his chin and all. he sat in one of the strangely
lowbacked chairs, at a table on the far side of the room, rattling a leather dice
cup and smiling at the man across from him. that fellow wore a long coat and
baggy breeches, and he was not smiling. he stared at the coins on the table as
if wishing he had them back in his purse. another dice cup sat at comars
elbow.
comar upended the leather cup in his hand, and began laughing almost
before the dice stopped spinning. who is next? he called loudly, pulling the
wager to his side of the table. there was already a considerable pile of silver
in front of him. he scooped the dice into the cup and rattled them. surely
someone else wants to try his luck? it seemed that no one did, but he kept
rattling the cup and laughing.
the innkeeper was easy to pick out, though they did not seem to wear
aprons in tear. his coat was the same shade of deep blue as that of every
other innkeeper mat had spoken to. a plump man, though little more than half
the size of lopar and with half that fellows number of chins, he was sitting at
a table by himself, polishing a pewter mug furiously and glaring across the
room toward comar, though not when comar was looking. some of the other
men gave the bearded man sidelong frowns, too. but not when he was
looking.
mat suppressed his first urge, which was to rush over to comar, drub him
over the head with his quarterstaff, and demand to know where egwene and
the others were. something was wrong here. comar was the first man he had
seen wearing a sword, but the way the men looked at him was more than fear


 of a swordsman. even the serving woman who brought comar a fresh cup of
wineand was pinched for her troublehad a nervous laugh for him.
look at it from every side, mat thought wearily. half the trouble i get into
is from not doing that. i have to think. tiredness seemed to have stuffed his
head with wool. he motioned to thom, and they strolled over to the
innkeeper, who eyed them suspiciously when they sat down. who is the man
with the stripe in his beard? mat asked.
not from the city, are you? the innkeeper said. he is a foreigner, too.
ive never seen him before tonight, but i know what he is. some outlander
who has come here and made his fortune in trade. a merchant rich enough to
wear a sword. that is no reason for him to treat us like this.
if you have never seen him before, mat said, how do you know he is a
merchant?
the innkeeper looked at him as if he were stupid. his coat, man, and his
sword. he cannot be a lord or a soldier if hes from off, so he has to be a rich
merchant. he shook his head for the stupidity of foreigners. they come to
our places, to look down their noses at us, and fondle the girls under our very
eyes, but he has no call to do this. if i go to the maule, i dont gamble for
some fishermans coins. if i go to the tavar, i do not dice with the farmers
come to sell their crops. his polishing gained in ferocity. such luck, the
man has. it must be how he made his fortune.
he wins, does he? yawning, mat wondered how he would do dicing with
another man who had luck.
sometimes he loses, the innkeeper muttered, when the stake is a few
silver pennies. sometimes. but let it reach a silver mark. . . . no less than a
dozen times tonight, i have seen him win at crowns with three crowns and
two roses. and half again as often, at top, it has been three sixes and two
fives. he tosses nothing but sixes at threes, and three sixes and a five every
throw at compass. if he has such luck, i say the light shine on him, and well
to him, but let him use it with other merchants, as is proper. how can a man
have such luck?
weighted dice, thom said, then coughed. when he wants to be sure of
winning, he uses dice that always show the same face. he is smart enough not
to have made it the highest tossfolk become suspicious if you always throw
the kinghe raised an eyebrow at matjust one thats all but impossible
to beat, but he cannot change that they always show the same face.
i have heard of such, the innkeeper said slowly. illianers use them, i


 hear. then he shook his head. but both men use the same cup and dice. it
cannot be.
bring me two dice cups, thom said, and two sets of dice. crowns or
spots, it makes no difference, so long as they are the same.
the innkeeper frowned at him, but leftprudently taking the pewter cup
with himand came back with two leather cups. thom rolled the five bone
cubes from one onto the table in front of mat. whether with spots or symbols,
every set of dice mat had ever seen had been either bone or wood. these had
spots. he picked them up, frowning at thom. am i supposed to see
something?
thom dumped the dice from the other cup into his hand, then, almost too
quickly to follow, dropped them back in and twisted the cup over to rest
upside down on the table before the dice could fall out. he kept his hand on
top of the cup. put a mark on each of them, boy. something small, but
something youll know for your mark.
mat found himself exchanging puzzled glances with the innkeeper. then
they both looked at the cup upside down under thoms hand. he knew thom
was up to something trickygleemen were always doing things that were
impossible, like eating fire and pulling silk out of the airbut he did not see
how thom could do anything with him watching close. he unsheathed his
belt knife and made a small scratch on each die, right across the circle of six
spots.
all right, he said, setting them back on the table. show me your trick.
thom reached over and picked up the dice, then set them down again a foot
away. look for your marks, boy.
mat frowned. thoms hand was still on the upended leather cup; the
gleeman had not moved it or taken mats dice anywhere near it. he picked up
the dice . . . and blinked. there was not a scratch on them. the innkeeper
gasped.
thom turned his free hand over, revealing five dice. your marks are on
these. that is what comar is doing. it is a childs trick, simple, though id
never have thought he had the fingers for it.
i do not think i want to play dice with you after all, mat said slowly. the
innkeeper was staring at the dice, but not as if he saw any solution. call the
watch, or whatever you call it here, mat told him. have him arrested.
hell kill nobody in a prison cell. yet what if they are already dead? he tried


 not to listen, but the thought persisted. then ill see him dead, and gaebril,
whatever it takes! but they arent, burn me! they cant be!
the innkeeper was shaking his head. me? me, denounce a merchant to the
defenders? they would not even look at his dice. he could say one word, and
i would be in chains working the channeldredges in the fingers of the
dragon. he could cut me down where i stood, and the defenders would say i
had earned it. perhaps he will go away after a while.
mat gave him a wry grimace. if i expose him, will that be good enough?
will you call the watch, or the defenders or whoever, then?
you do not understand. you are a foreigner. even if he is from off, he is a
wealthy man, important.
wait here, mat told thom. i do not mean to let him reach egwene and
the others, whatever it takes. he yawned as he scraped back his chair.
wait, boy, thom called after him, soft yet urgent. the gleeman pushed
himself up out of his chair. burn you, you dont know what youre putting
your foot into!
mat waved for him to stay there and walked over to comar. no one else
had taken up the bearded mans challenge, and he eyed mat with interest as
mat leaned his quarterstaff against the table and sat down.
comar studied mats coat and grinned nastily. you want to wager coppers,
farmer? i do not waste my time with he cut off as mat set an andoran
gold crown on the table and yawned at him, making no effort to cover his
mouth. you say little, farmer, though your manners could use improving, but
gold has a voice of its own and no need of manners. he shook the leather
cup in his hand and spilled the dice out. he was chuckling before they came
to rest, showing three crowns and two roses. youll not beat that, farmer.
perhaps you have more gold hidden in those rags that you want to lose? what
did you do? rob your master?
he reached for the dice, but mat scooped them up ahead of him. comar
glared, but let him have the cup. if both tosses were the same, they would
throw again until one man won. mat smiled as he rattled the dice. he did not
mean to give comar a chance to change them. if they threw the same toss
three or four times in a rowexactly the same, every timeeven these
defenders would listen. the whole common room would see; they would
have to back his word.
he spilled the dice onto the tabletop. they bounced oddly. he felt


 somethingshifting. it was as if his luck had gone wild. the room seemed to
be writhing around him, tugging at the dice with threads. for some reason he
wanted to look at the door, but he kept his eyes on the dice. they came to rest.
five crowns. comars eyes looked ready to pop out of his head.
you lose, mat said softly. if his luck was in to this extent, perhaps it was
time to push it. a voice in the back of his head told him to think, but he was
too tired to listen. i think your luck is about used up, comar. if youve
harmed those girls, its all gone.
i have not even found . . . comar began, still staring at the dice, then
jerked his head up. his face had gone white. how do you know my name?
he had not found them, yet. luck, sweet luck, stay with me. go back to
caemlyn, comar. tell gaebril you could not find them. tell him they are
dead. tell him anything, but leave tear tonight. if i see you again, ill kill
you.
who are you? the big man said unsteadily. who? the next instant
his sword was out and he was on his feet.
mat shoved the table at him, overturning it, and grabbed for his
quarterstaff. he had forgotten how big comar was. the bearded man pushed
the table right back at him. mat fell over with his chair, holding a bare grasp
on his staff, as comar heaved the table out of the way and stabbed at him.
mat threw his feet against the mans middle to stop his rush, swung the staff
awkwardly, just enough to deflect the sword. but the blow knocked the staff
from his fingers, and he found himself gripping comars wrist, instead, with
the mans blade a hand from his face. with a grunt he rolled backwards,
heaving as hard as he could with his legs. comars eyes widened as he sailed
over mat to crash onto a table, face up. mat scrambled for his staff, but when
he had it, comar had not moved.
the big man lay with his hips and legs sprawled across the top of the table,
the rest of him hanging down with his head on the floor. the men who had
been sitting at the table were on their feet a safe distance away, wringing their
hands and eyeing each other nervously. a low, worried buzz filled the
common room, not the noise mat expected.
comars sword lay within easy reach of his hand. but he did not move. he
stared at mat, though, as mat kicked the sword away and went to one knee
beside him. light! i think his back is broken! i told you you should have
gone, comar. your luck is all used up.
fool, the big man breathed. do you . . . think i . . . was the only . . . one


 hunting them? they wont . . . live till. . . . his eyes stared at mat, and his
mouth was open, but he said no more. nor ever would again.
mat met the glazing stare, trying to will more words out of the dead man.
who else, burn you? who? where are they? my luck. burn me, what
happened to my luck? he became aware of the innkeeper pulling frantically at
his arm.
you must go. you must. before the defenders come. i will show them the
dice. i will tell them it was an outlander, but a tall man. with redcolored hair,
and gray eyes. no one will suffer. a man i dreamed of last night. no one real.
no one will contradict me. he took coin from everyone with his dice. but you
must go. you must! everyone else in the room was studiously looking
another way.
mat let himself be hauled away from the dead man and pushed outside.
thom was already waiting in the rain. he seized mats arm and limped down
the street hurriedly, pulling mat stumbling behind him. mats hood hung
down his back; the rain soaked his hair and poured down his face, down his
neck, but he did not notice. the gleeman kept looking over his shoulder,
searching the street beyond mat.
are you asleep, boy? you did not look asleep back there. come on, boy.
the defenders will arrest any outlander within two streets, no matter what
description that innkeeper gives.
its the luck, mat mumbled. ive figured it out. the dice. my luck works
best when things are . . . random. like dice. not much good for cards. no
good at stones. too much pattern. it has to be random. even finding comar.
id stopped visiting every inn. i walked into that one by chance. thom, if i am
going to find egwene and the others in time, i have to look without any
pattern.
what are you talking about? the man is dead. if he already killed them.
. . . well, youve avenged them. if he hasnt, you saved them. now will you
bloody walk faster? the defenders wont be long coming, and they are not so
gentle as the queens guards.
mat shook his arm free and picked up his pace unsteadily, dragging the
quarterstaff. he let it slip that he hadnt located them, yet. but he said he was
not the only one. thom, i believe him. i was looking him in the eye, and he
was telling the truth. i still have to find them, thom. and now i dont even
know who is after them. i have to find them.
stifling a huge yawn with his fist, thom pulled mats hood up against the


 rain. not tonight, boy. i need sleep, and so do you.
wet. my hairs dripping in my face. his head seemed fuzzy. with a need for
sleep, he realized after a moment. and he realized how tired he was, if he had
to think just to know it. all right, thom. but i am going to look again as
soon as its light. thom nodded and coughed, and they made their way back
to the white crescent through the rain.
dawn was not long in coming, but mat rousted himself out of bed, and he
and thom set off trying to search every inn inside the walls of tear. mat let
himself wander wherever the mood and the next turning took him, not looking
for inns at all, and tossing a coin to decide whether to go in. for three days
and nights he did this, and for three days and nights it rained without
stopping, sometimes thundering, sometimes quiet, but always pouring down.
thoms cough grew worse, so he had to stop playing the flute and telling
stories, and he would not carry his harp out in that weather; he insisted on
going along, however, and men still talked to a gleeman. mats luck with the
dice seemed even better since he had begun this random wander, though he
never stayed in one inn or tavern long enough to win more than a few coins.
neither of them heard anything useful. rumors of war with illian. rumors of
invading mayene. rumors of invasion from andor, of the sea folk shutting
off trade, of artur hawkwings armies returning from the dead. rumors the
dragon was coming. the men mat gambled with were as gloomy about one
rumor as the next; they seemed to him to hunt for the darkest rumors they
could find and half believe them all. but he heard not a whisper that might
lead him to egwene and the others. not one innkeeper had seen women
matching their descriptions.
he began to have bad dreams, no doubt from all his worrying. egwene and
nynaeve and elayne, and some fellow with closecropped white hair, wearing
a coat with puffy, striped sleeves like comars, laughing and weaving a net
around them. only sometimes it was moiraine he was weaving the net for,
and sometimes he held a crystal sword instead, a sword that blazed like the
sun as soon as he touched it. sometimes it was rand who held the sword. for
some reason, he dreamed of rand a good deal.
mat was sure it was all because he was not getting enough sleep, not eating
except when he happened to remember, but he would not stop. he had a
wager to win, he told himself, and he meant to win this one if it killed him.


  c h a p t e r
5 0


the hammer


the afternoon sun was hot as the ferry docked in tear; puddles stood on the
steaming stones of the dock, and the air seemed almost as damp to perrin as
illians had. the air smelled of pitch and wood and ropehe could see
shipyards further south along the riverof spices and iron and barley, of
perfumes and wines and a hundred different aromas he could not single out
from the melange, most coming from the warehouses behind the docks. when
the wind swirled momentarily out of the north, he caught the scents of fish,
too, but those faded as the wind swung back. no smells of anything to hunt.
his mind reached out to feel for wolves before he realized what he was doing
and snapped his guards shut. he had done that too often of late. there had
been no wolves, of course. not in a city like this. he wished it did not feel so
alone.
as soon as the ramp at the end of the barge was lowered, he led stepper up
to the dock after moiraine and lan. the huge shape of the stone of tear lay
off to their left, shadowed so that it looked like a mountain despite the great
banner at its highest point. he did not want to look at the stone, but it seemed
impossible to look at the city without seeing it. is he here yet? light, if he has
already tried to get into that, he could be dead already. and then it would all
be for nothing.
what are we meant to find here? zarine asked behind him. she had not
stopped asking questions; she just did not ask them of the aes sedai or the
warder. illian showed us gray men and the wild hunt. what does tear hold
thatthat someone wants to keep you from so badly?
perrin glanced around; none of the dockmen shuttling cargo about seemed
to have heard. he was sure he would have smelled fear if they had. he bit


 back the sharp remark that hung on the end of his tongue. she had a quicker
tongue, and a sharper.
i wish you did not sound so eager, loial rumbled. you seem to think it
will all be as easy as illian, faile.
easy? zarine muttered. easy! loial, we were nearly killed twice in one
night. illian was enough for a hunters song in itself. what makes you call it
easy?
perrin grimaced. he wished loial had not decided to call zarine by that
name she had chosen; it was a constant reminder that moiraine thought she
was mins falcon. and it did nothing to stop perrin wondering if she was the
beautiful woman min had warned him against, too. at least ive not run up
against the hawk. or a tuathaan with a sword! now that would the strangest
of all, or i am a wool merchant!
stop asking questions, zarine, he said as he swung up into steppers
saddle. you will find out why we are here when moiraine decides to tell
you. he tried not to look at the stone.
she turned those dark, tilted eyes on him. i do not think you know why,
blacksmith. i think that is why you will not tell me, because you cannot.
admit it, farmboy.
with a small sigh, he rode off the docks after moiraine and lan. zarine did
not dig at loial in that cutting way when the ogier refused to answer her
questions. he thought she must be trying to browbeat him into using that
name. he would not.
moiraine had tied the oiled cloak behind her saddle, atop the innocuouslooking bundle that held the dragon banner, and despite the heat had donned
the blue linen cloak from illian. its deep, wide hood hid her face. her great
serpent ring was on a cord around her neck. tear, she had said, did not forbid
the presence of aes sedai, only channeling, but the defenders of the stone
kept a close eye on any woman who wore the ring. she did not want to be
watched on this visit to tear.
lan had stuffed his colorshifting cloak into his saddlebags two days
earlier, when it had become apparent that whoever had sent the darkhounds
sammael, perrin thought with a shiver, and tried not to think of the name at
allwhoever had sent them had not sent any more pursuit. the warder had
made no concessions to the heat of illian, and he made none to the lesser heat
of tear. his graygreen coat was buttoned up all the way.


 perrin wore his coat half undone, and the neck of his shirt untied. tear
might be a little cooler than illian, but it was still as hot as summer in the two
rivers, and as always after rain, the dampness of the air made the heat seem
worse. his axe belt hung looped around the tall pommel of his saddle. it was
handy there, if he needed it, and he felt better not wearing it.
he was surprised at the mud in the first streets they rode along. only
villages and smaller towns had dirt streets, that he had seen, and tear was one
of the great cities. but the people did not seem to mind, many going barefoot.
a woman walking on little wooden platforms caught his attention for a time,
and he wondered why they did not all wear them. those baggy breeches on
the men looked as if they might be cooler than the snug ones he wore, but he
was sure he would feel a fool if he tried them. he made a picture in his head
of himself wearing those breeches and one of those round straw hats, and
chuckled at it.
what do you find funny, perrin? loial asked. his ears were drooping till
their tufts were hidden in his hair, and he looked at the people in the street
worriedly. these folk look . . . defeated, perrin. they did not look this way
when i was here last. even people who let their grove be cut down do not
deserve to look like this.
as perrin began to study faces instead of just looking at everything at once,
he saw that loial was right. something had gone out of too many of those
faces. hope, maybe. curiosity. they barely glanced at the party riding by,
except to get out of the way of the horses. the ogier, mounted on an animal
as big as a draft horse, might as well have been lan, or perrin.
the streets changed, gaining wide stone paving, after they passed inside the
gates of the high, gray city wall, past the hard, dark eyes of soldiers in
breastplates over red coats with wide sleeves ending in narrow white cuffs,
and rimmed, round helmets with a ridge over the top. instead of the baggy
breeches other men wore, theirs were tight, and tucked into kneehigh boots.
the soldiers frowned at lans sword and fingered their own, stared sharply at
perrins axe and his bow, but in a way, despite their frowns and sharp looks,
there was something beaten in their faces, too, as if nothing were really worth
the effort any longer.
the buildings were larger and taller inside the walls, though most were
made no differently from those outside. the roofs looked a bit odd to perrin,
especially those that came to points, but he had seen so many different kinds
of roof since leaving home that he only wondered what kind of nails they
used with their tiles. in some places, the people did not use nails on their roof


 tiles at all.
palaces and great buildings stood among the smaller and more ordinary,
seemingly placed haphazardly; a structure of towers and squarish, white
domes, surrounded on all sides by wide streets, might have shops and inns
and houses on the other sides of those streets. a huge hall fronted by squared
columns of marble four paces on a side, with fifty steps to climb to reach
bronze doors five spans high, had a bakery one side and a tailor on the other.
more men wore coats and breeches like the soldiers here, though in
brighter colors and without armor, and some even wore swords. none of them
went barefoot, not even those in baggy breeches. the womens dresses were
often longer, their necklines lower to bare shoulders and even bosom, the
cloth as likely to be silk as wool. the sea folk traded a good deal of silk
through tear. as many sedan chairs and carriages drawn by teams of horses
moved through the streets as oxcarts and wagons. yet too many of the faces
had that same look of having given up.
the inn lan chose, the star, had a weavers shop on one side and a smithy
on the other, with narrow alleyways between. the smithy was of undressed
gray stone, the weavers and the inn of wood, though the star stood four
stories tall and had small windows in its roof as well. the rattle of looms was
hardpressed to compete with the clang of the smiths hammer. they handed
their horses over to stablemen, to be taken around back, and went inside the
inn. there were fish smells from the kitchen, baking and perhaps stewing, and
the scent of roast mutton. the men in the common room all wore the tight
coats and loose breeches; perrin did not think richer mensomehow he was
sure the men in colorful coats with puffy sleeves and the bareshouldered
women in bright silk were all rich, or noblesthose folk would not put up
with the noise. perhaps that was why lan had chosen it.
how are we supposed to sleep with this racketing? zarine muttered.
no questions? he said with a smile. for a moment he thought she was
going to stick out her tongue at him.
the innkeeper was a roundfaced, balding man in a long, deep blue coat
and those loose breeches, who bowed over hands clasped across his stout
belly. his face had that look, a weary resignation. the light shine on you,
mistresses, and welcome, he sighed. the light shine on you, masters, and
welcome. he gave a small start at perrins yellow eyes, then passed wearily
on to loial. the light shine on you, friend ogier, and welcome. it is a year
or more since i have seen one of your kind in tear. some work or other at the


 stone. they stayed in the stone, of course, but i saw them in the street one
day. he finished with another sigh, seemingly unable to summon any
curiosity as to why another ogier had come to tear, or why any of them had
come, for that matter.
the balding man, whose name was jurah haret, showed them to their
rooms himself. apparently moiraines silk dress and the way she kept her
face hidden, taken with lans hard face and sword, made them a lady and her
guard in his eyes, and so worthy of his personal attention. perrin he obviously
took as some kind of retainer, and zarine he was plainly unsure ofto her
visible disgustand loial was, after all, an ogier. he called men to push
beds together for loial, and offered moiraine a private room for her meals if
she wished. she accepted graciously.
they kept together through it all, making a small procession through the
upper halls until haret bowed and sighed his way out of their presence,
leaving them all where they had begun, outside moiraines room. the walls
were white plaster, and loials head brushed the hall ceiling.
odious fellow, zarine muttered, brushing furiously at the dust on her
narrow skirts with both hands. i believe he took me for your handmaid, aes
sedai. i will not stand for that!
watch your tongue, lan said softly. if you use that name where folk can
hear, you will regret it, girl. she looked as if she were going to argue, but his
icy blue eyes stilled her tongue this time, if it did not cool her glare.
moiraine ignored them. staring off at nothing, she worked her cloak in her
hands almost as if wiping them. unaware what she was doing, in perrins
opinion.
how do we go about finding rand? he asked, but she did not appear to
hear him. moiraine?
remain close to the inn, she said after a moment. tear can be a
dangerous city for those who do not know its ways. the pattern can be torn,
here. that last was soft, as if to herself. in a stronger voice she said, lan, let
us see what we can discover without attracting attention. the rest of you, stay
close to the inn!
 stay close to the inn,  zarine mimicked as the aes sedai and the
warder disappeared down the stairs. but she said it quietly enough that they
would not hear. this rand. he is the one you called the. . . . if she looked
like a falcon right then, it was a very uneasy falcon. and we are in tear,
where the heart of the stone holds. . . . and the prophecies say. . . . the light


 burn me, taveren, is this a story i want to be in?
it is not a story, zarine. for a moment perrin felt almost as hopeless as
the innkeeper had sounded. the wheel weaves us into the pattern. you
chose to tangle your thread with ours; its too late to untangle it, now.
light! she growled. now you sound like her!
he left her there with loial and went to put his things in his roomit had a
low bed, comfortable but small, as city people seemed to think befitted a
servant, a washstand, a stool, and a few pegs on the cracked plaster walland
when he came out, they were both gone. the ring of hammer on anvil called
to him.
so much in tear looked odd that it was a relief to walk into the smithy. the
ground floor was all one large room with no back wall except for two long
doors that stood open on a yard for shoeing horses and oxen, complete with
an ox sling. hammers stood in their stands, tongs of various kinds and sizes
hung on the exposed joists of the walls, buttresses and hoof knives and other
farriers tools lay neatly arranged on wooden benches with chisels and beak
irons and swages and all the implements of the blacksmiths craft. bins held
lengths of iron and steel in various thicknesses. five grinding wheels of
different roughness stood about the hard dirt floor, six anvils, and three stonesided forges with their bellows, though only one held glowing coals.
quenching barrels stood ready to hand.
the smith was plying his hammer on yellowhot iron gripped in heavy
tongs. he wore baggy breeches and had pale blue eyes, but the long leather
vest over his bare chest and apron were not much different from those perrin
and master luhhan had worn back in emonds field, and his thick arms and
shoulders spoke of years working metal. his dark hair had almost the same
amount of gray that perrin remembered in master luhhans. more vests and
aprons hung on the wall, as if the man had apprentices, but they were not in
evidence now. the forgefire smelled like home. the hot iron smelled like
home.
the smith turned to thrust the piece he was working back into the coals,
and perrin stepped over to work the bellows for him. the man glanced at him,
but said nothing. perrin pulled the bellows handle up and down with slow,
steady, even strokes, keeping the coals at the right heat. the smith went back
to working the hot iron, on the rounded horn of the anvil, this time. perrin
thought he might be making a barrel scrape. the hammer rang with sharp,
quick blows.


 the man spoke without looking up from his work. apprentice? was all
he said.
yes, perrin replied just as simply.
the smith worked on for a time. it was a barrel scrape, for cleaning the
insides of wooden barrels. now and again he eyed perrin consideringly.
setting his hammer down, just for a moment, the smith picked up a short
length of thick, square stock and pushed it into perrins hand, then picked up
his hammer again and resumed work. see what you can do with that, he
said.
without even thinking about it, perrin stepped over to an anvil on the other
side of the forge and tapped the stock against its edge. it made a nice ring.
the steel had not been left long enough in the slowfurnace to pick up a great
deal of carbon from the coal. he pushed it into the hot coals for almost its
entire length, tasted the two water barrels to see which had been saltedthe
third was olive oilthen took off his coat and shirt and chose a leather vest
that would fit his chest. most of these tairen fellows were not as large as he,
but he found one that would do. finding an apron was easier.
when he turned around, he saw the smith, still with his head down over his
work, nodding and smiling to himself. but just because he knew his way
around a smithy did not mean he had any skill at smithing. that was yet to be
shown.
when he came back to the anvil with two hammers, a set of longhandled
flattongs, and a sharptopped hardy, the steel bar had heated to a dark red
except for a small bit of what he had left out of the coals. he worked the
bellows, watching the color of the metal lighten, until it reached a yellow just
short of white. then he pulled it out with the tongs, laid it on the anvil, and
picked up the heavier of the two hammers. about ten pounds, he estimated,
and with a longer handle than most people, who did not know metal working,
thought was necessary. he held it near the end; hot metal gave off sparks,
sometimes, and he had seen the scars on the hands of the smith from up at
roundhill, a careless fellow.
he did not want to make anything elaborate or fancy. simple things seemed
best at the moment. he began by rounding the edges of the bar, then
hammered the middle out into a broad blade, almost as thick as the original at
the butt, but a good hand and a half long. from time to time he returned the
metal to the coals, to keep it at the pale yellow, and after a time he shifted to
the lighter hammer, half the weight of the first. the piece beyond the blade,


 he thinned down, then bent it over the anvil horn in a curve down beside the
blade. a wooden handle could be fixed onto that, eventually. setting the
sharpchisel hardy in the anvils hardyhole, he laid the glowing metal atop it.
one sharp blow of the hammer cut off the tool he had made. or almost made.
it would be a chamfer knife, for smoothing and leveling the tops of barrel
staves after they were hopped together, among other things. when he was
done. the other mans barrel scrape had made him think of it.
as soon as he had made the hotcut, he tossed the glowing metal into the
salted quenching barrel. unsalted gave a harder quench, for the hardest metal,
while the oil gave the softest, for good knives. and swords, he had heard, but
he had never had any part in making anything like that.
when the metal had cooled enough, to a dull gray, he removed it from the
water and took it to the grinding wheels. a little slow work with the
footpedals ground a polish onto the blade. carefully, he heated the blade
portion again. this time the colors deepened, to straw, to bronze. when the
bronze color began to run up the blade in waves, he set it aside to cool. the
final edge could be sharpened then. quenching again would destroy the
tempering he had just done.
a very neat bit of work, the smith said. no wasted motion. you looking
for work? my apprentices just walked away, all three of them, the worthless
fools, and ive plenty you could do.
perrin shook his head. i do not know how long i will be in tear. id like to
work a little longer, if you do not mind. it has been a long time, and i miss it.
maybe i could do some of the work your apprentices would have done.
the smith snorted loudly. youre a deal better than any of those louts,
moping around and staring, muttering about their nightmares. as if everyone
doesnt have nightmares, sometimes. yes, you can work here, as long as you
want. light, ive orders for a dozen drawknives and three coopers adzes, and
a carpenter down the street needs a mortise hammer, and. . . . too much to list
it. start with the drawknives, and we will see how far we get before night.
perrin lost himself in the work, for a time forgetting everything but the heat
of the metal, the ring of his hammer, and the smell of the forge, but there
came a time when he looked up and found the smithdermid ajala, he had
said his name wastaking off his vest, and the shoeing yard dark. all the
light came from the forge and a pair of lamps. and zarine was sitting on an
anvil by one of the cold forges, watching him.
so you really are a blacksmith, blacksmith, she said.


 he is that, mistress, ajala said. apprentice, he says, but the work he did
today amounts to his masters piece as far as i am concerned. fine stroking,
and better than steady. perrin shifted his feet at the compliments, and the
smith grinned at him. zarine stared at both of them with a lack of
comprehension.
perrin went to replace the vest and apron on their peg, but once he had
them off, he was suddenly conscious of zarines eyes on his back. it was if
she were touching him; for a moment, the herbal scent of her seemed
overwhelming. he quickly pulled his shirt over his head, stuffed it raggedly
into his breeches, and jerked on his coat. when he turned around, zarine wore
one of those small, secretive smiles that had always made him nervous.
is this what you mean to do, then? she asked. did you come all this way
to be a blacksmith again? ajala paused in the act of pulling the yard doors
closed and listened.
perrin picked up the heavy hammer he had used, a tenpound head with a
handle as long as his forearm. it felt good in his hands. it felt right. the smith
had glanced at his eyes once and never even blinked; it was the work that was
important, the skill with metal, not the color of a mans eyes. no, he said
sadly. one day, i hope. but not yet. he started to hang the hammer back on
the wall.
take it. ajala cleared his throat. i do not usually give away good
hammers, but. . . . the work youve done today is worth more than the price
of that hammer by far, and maybe it will help you to that one day. man, if i
have ever seen anyone made to hold a smiths hammer, it is you. so take it.
keep it.
perrin closed his hand around the haft. it did feel right. thank you, he
said. i cannot say what this means to me.
just remember the one day, man. just you remember it.
as they left, zarine looked up at him and said, do you have any idea how
strange men are, blacksmith? no. i did not think you did. she darted ahead,
leaving him holding the hammer in one hand and scratching his head with the
other.
no one in the common room looked at him twice, a goldeneyed man
carrying a smiths hammer. he went up to his room, remembering for once to
light a tallow candle. his quiver and the axe hung from the same peg on the
plaster wall. he hefted the axe in one hand, the hammer in the other. by
weight of metal, the axe, with its halfmoon blade and thick spike, was a good


 five or six pounds lighter than the hammer, but it felt ten times heavier.
replacing the axe in the loop on its belt, he set the hammer on the floor
beneath the peg, handle against the wall. axe haft and hammer haft almost
touched, two pieces of wood equally thick. two pieces of metal, near enough
the same weight. for a long time he sat on the stool staring at them. he was
still staring when lan put his head into the room.
come, blacksmith. we have things to talk over.
i am a blacksmith, perrin said, and the warder frowned at him.
dont go wintercrazy on me now, blacksmith. if you cannot carry your
weight any longer, you may drag us all down the mountain.
ill carry my weight, perrin growled. i will do what has to be done.
what do you want?
you, blacksmith. dont you listen? come on, farmboy.
that name that zarine so often called him pulled him to his feet angrily,
now, but lan was already turning away. perrin hurried into the hall and
followed him toward the front of the inn, meaning to tell the warder he had
had enough of this blacksmith and farmboy, his name was perrin aybara.
the warder ducked into the inns only private dining room, overlooking the
street.
perrin followed him. now listen, warder, i
you listen, perrin, moiraine said. be quiet and listen. her face was
smooth, but her eyes looked as grim as her voice sounded.
perrin had not realized anyone was in the room except for himself and the
warder, standing with one arm up on the mantel of the unlit fireplace.
moiraine sat at the table in the middle of the floor, a simple piece, of black
oak. none of the other chairs with their high, carved backs were occupied.
zarine was leaning against the wall at the other end of the room from lan,
scowling, and loial had chosen to sit on the floor since none of the chairs
really fit him.
im glad you decided to join us, farmboy, zarine said sarcastically.
moiraine would not say anything till you came. she just looks at us as if she
is deciding which of us is going to die. i
be quiet, moiraine told her sharply. one of the forsaken is in tear. the
high lord samon is belal. perrin shivered.
loial squeezed his eyes shut and groaned. i could have remained in the


 stedding. i would probably have been very happy, married, whoever my
mother chose. she is a fine woman, my mother, and she would not give me to
a bad wife. his ears seemed to have hidden themselves completely in his
shaggy hair.
you can go back to stedding shangtai, moiraine said. leave now, if you
wish. i will not stop you.
loial opened one eye. i can go?
if you wish, she said.
oh. he opened the other eye, and scratched his cheek with blunt fingers
the size of sausages. i suppose. . . . i suppose . . . if i have a choice . . . that i
will stay with all of you. i have taken a great many notes, but not nearly
enough to complete my book, and i would not like to leave perrin, and rand


moiraine cut him off in a cold voice. good, loial. i am glad that you are
staying. i will be glad to use any knowledge you have. but until this is done, i
have no time to listen to your complaints!
i suppose, zarine said in an unsteady voice, that there is no chance of
me leaving? she looked at moiraine, and shivered. i thought not.
blacksmith, if i live through this, i will make you pay.
perrin stared at her. me! the fool woman thinks it my fault? did i ask her to
come? he opened his mouth, saw the look in moiraines eyes, and closed it
again quickly. after a moment he said, is he after rand? to stop him, or kill
him?
i think not, she said quietly. her voice was like cold steel. i fear he
means to let rand enter the heart of the stone and take callandor, then take
it away from him. i fear he means to kill the dragon reborn with the very
weapon that is meant to herald him.
do we run again? zarine said. like illian? i never thought to run, but i
never thought to find the forsaken when i took the hunters oath.
this time, moiraine said, we do not run. we dare not run. worlds and
time rest on rand, on the dragon reborn. this time, we fight.
perrin took a chair uneasily. moiraine, you are saying a lot of things right
out that you told us we must not even think about. you do have this room
warded against listening, dont you? when she shook her head, he gripped
the edge of the table hard enough to make the dark oak creak.


 i do not speak of a myrddraal, perrin. no one knows the strength of the
forsaken, except that ishamael and lanfear were the strongest, but the
weakest of them could sense any warding i might set from a mile or more
away. and rip all of us to shreds in seconds. possibly without stirring from
where he stood.
youre saying he can tie you in knots, perrin muttered. light! what are
we supposed to do? how can we do anything?
even the forsaken cannot stand up to balefire, she said. he wondered if
that was what she had used on the darkhounds; it still made him uneasy, what
he had seen, and what she had said then. i have learned things in the last
year, perrin. i am . . . more dangerous than when i came to emonds field. if i
can come close enough to belal, i can destroy him. but if he sees me first, he
can destroy us all, long before i have a chance. she turned her attention to
loial. what can you tell me of belal?
perrin blinked in confusion. loial?
why are you asking him? zarine burst out angrily. first you tell the
blacksmith you mean us to fight one of the forsaken!who can kill us all
before we can even think!and now you ask loial about him? loial
murmured urgently, that name she usedfaile! faile!but she did not
even slow. i thought aes sedai knew everything. light, at least i am smart
enough not to say i will fight someone unless i know everything i can of him!
you. . . . she trailed off under moiraines stare, muttering.
ogier, the aes sedai said coolly, have long memories, girl. it has been
well over a hundred generations since the breaking for humans, but less than
thirty for ogier. we still learn things from their stories that we did not know.
now tell me, loial. what do you know of belal. and briefly, for once. i
want your long memory, not your long wind.
loial cleared his throat, a sound much like firewood tumbling down a
chute. belal. his ears flickered out of his hair like hummingbird wings,
then snapped down again. i do not know what can be in the stories about him
you do not already know. he is not much mentioned, except in the razing of
the hall of the servants just before lews therin kinslayer and the hundred
companions sealed him up with the dark one. jalanda son of aried son of
coiam wrote that he was called the envious, that he forsook the light
because he envied lews therin, and that he envied ishamael and lanfear, too.
in a study of the war of the shadow, moilin daughter of hamada daughter of
juendan called belal the netweaver, but i do not know why. she mentioned


 him playing a game of stones with lews therin and winning, and that he
always boasted of it. he glanced at moiraine and rumbled, i am trying to be
brief. i do not know anything important about him. several writers say belal
and sammael were both leaders in the fight against the dark one before they
forsook the light, and both were masters of the sword. that is truly all i
know. he may be mentioned in other books, other stories, but i have not read
them. belal is just not spoken of very often. i am sorry i could not tell you
anything useful.
perhaps you have, moiraine told him. i did not know of the name, the
netweaver. or that he envied the dragon as well as his companions in the
shadow. that strengthens my belief that he wants callandor. that must be
the reason he has chosen to make himself a high lord of tear. and the
netweavera name for a schemer, a patient and cunning planner. you have
done well, loial. for a moment the ogiers wide mouth curved up in a
pleased smile, but then it curved down again.
i will not pretend i am not afraid, zarine said suddenly. only a fool
would not be afraid of the forsaken. but i swore i would be one of you, and i
will. that is all that i wanted to say.
perrin shook his head. she must be crazy. i could wish i were not one of
this party. i could wish i were back home working master luhhans forge.
aloud, he said, if he is inside the stone, if he is waiting there for rand, we
must go inside to reach him. how do we do that? everyone keeps saying no
one enters the stone without the permission of the high lords, and looking at
it, i dont see any way but through the gates.
you do not go in, lan said. moiraine and i will be the only ones to
enter. the more who go, the harder it will be. whatever way in i find, i
cannot believe it will be easy even for only two.
gaidin, moiraine began in a firm voice, but the warder cut her off with
one just as firm.
we go together, moiraine. i will not stand aside this time. after a
moment she nodded. perrin thought he saw lan relax. the rest of you had
better get some sleep, the warder went on. i have to be out studying the
stone. he paused. there is a thing that your news drove out of my head,
moiraine. a small thing, and i cannot see what it might mean. there are aiel
in tear.
aiel! loial exclaimed. impossible! the entire city would be in a panic if
one aiel came through the gates.


 i did not say they were walking the streets, ogier. the rooftops and
chimneys of the city make as good hiding as the waste. i saw no less than
three, though apparently no one else in tear has seen any of them. and if i
saw three, you can be sure there are many times that i did not see.
it means nothing to me, moiraine said slowly. perrin, why are you
frowning in that way?
he had not known that he was frowning. i was thinking about that aiel in
remen. he said that when the stone falls, the aiel will leave the threefold
land. thats the waste, isnt it? he said it was a prophecy.
i have read every word of the prophecies of the dragon, moiraine said
softly, in every translation, and there is no mention of the aiel. we stagger
blindly while belal weaves his nets, and the wheel weaves the pattern
around us. but are the aiel the wheels weaving, or belals? lan, you must
find me the way into the stone quickly. us. find us a way in quickly.
as you command, aes sedai, he said, but his tone was more warm than
formal. he vanished through the door. moiraine frowned at the table, eyes
clouded in thought.
zarine came over to look down at perrin, her head tilted to one side. and
what are you going to do, blacksmith? it seems they mean us to wait and
watch while they go adventuring. not that i will complain.
he doubted that last. first, he told her, i am going to have something to
eat. and then i am going to think about a hammer. and try to puzzle out how
i feel about you. falcon.


 c h a p t e r
5 1


bait for the net


from the corner of her eye, nynaeve thought she glimpsed a tall man with
reddish hair, in a swirling brown cloak, well down the sunlit street, but as she
turned to peer from under the wide brim of the blue straw hat ailhuin had
given her, an oxdrawn wagon was already lumbering between them. when it
lurched on, the man was nowhere to be seen. she was almost certain that had
been a wooden flute case on his back, and his clothes were certainly not
tairen. it couldnt be rand. just because i keep dreaming about him does not
mean he is going to come all the way from almoth plain.
one of the barefoot men hurrying past, with the sickleshaped tails of a
dozen large fish sticking up from the basket on his back, suddenly tripped,
catapulting silverscaled fish over his head as he fell. he landed on hands and
knees in the mud, staring at the fish that had come out of his basket. every
one of the long, sleek shapes stood upright, stuck nose down in the mud,
forming a neat circle. even a few passersby gaped at that. slowly the man got
to his feet, apparently unaware of the mud on him. unslinging his basket, he
began gathering the fish back into it, shaking his head and muttering to
himself.
nynaeve blinked, but her business was with this cowfaced brigand, facing
her in the doorway of his shop with bloody cuts of meat hanging from hooks
behind him. she gave her braid a tug and fixed the fellow with her eye.
very well, she said sharply, i will take it, but if this is what you charge
for so poor a cut, youll not have more business from me.
he shrugged placidly as he took her coins, then wrapped the fatty mutton
roast in a cloth she produced from the basket on her arm. she glared at him as


 she put the wrapped meat into the basket, but that did not affect him.
she whirled to stalk awayand nearly fell. she was still not used to these
clogs; they kept sticking in the mud, and she could not see how the folk who
wore them managed. she hoped this sunshine dried the ground soon, but she
had a feeling that the mud was more or less permanent in the maule.
stepping gingerly, she started back toward ailhuins house, muttering
under her breath. the prices were outrageous for everything, the quality
inevitably poor, and almost no one seemed to care, not the people buying or
those selling. it was a relief to pass a woman shouting at a shopkeeper,
waving a bruised reddishyellow fruitnynaeve did not know what; they had
a good many fruits and vegetables she had never heard of, herein each hand
and calling for everyone to see what refuse the man sold, but the shopkeeper
only stared at her wearily, not even bothering to argue back.
there was some excuse for the prices, she knewelayne had explained all
about the grain being eaten by rats in the granaries because no one in cairhien
could buy, and how big the cairhienin grain trade had become since the aiel
warbut nothing excused the way everyone seemed ready to lie down and
die. she had seen hail ruin food crops in the two rivers, and grasshoppers eat
them and blacktongue kill the sheep and redspot wither the tabac so there was
nothing to sell when the merchants came down from baerlon. she could
remember two years in a row when there had been little to eat except turnip
soup and old barley, and hunters had been lucky to bring home a scrawny
rabbit, but two rivers folk picked themselves up when they were knocked
down and went back to work. these people had had only one bad year, and
their fisheries and their other trade seemed to be flourishing. she had no
patience with them. the trouble was, she knew she should have a little
patience. they were odd people with odd ways, and things she took for
cringing, they seemed to see as a matter of course, even ailhuin and sandar.
she should be able to summon up just a little patience.
if for them, why not for egwene? she put that aside. the child behaved
wretchedly, snapping at the most obvious suggestions, objecting to the most
sensible things. even when it was plain what they should do, egwene wanted
to be convinced. nynaeve was not used to having to convince people,
especially not people she had changed swaddling clothes for. the fact that she
was only a matter of seven years older than egwene was of no account.
it is all those bad dreams, she told herself. i cannot understand what they
mean, and now elayne and i are having them, too, and i do not know what
that means either, and sandar wont say anything except that he is still


 looking, and i am so frustrated i . . . i could just spit! she jerked her braid so
hard it hurt. at least she had been able to convince egwene not to use the
terangreal again, to put the thing back in her pouch instead of wearing it next
to her skin always. if the black ajah was in telaranrhiod. . . . she did not
want to think about that possibility. we will find them!
i will bring them down, she muttered. trying to sell me like a sheep!
hunting me like an animal! i am the hunter this time, not the rabbit! that
moiraine! if she had never come to emonds field, i could have taught
egwene enough. and rand. . . . i could have . . . i could have done
something. that she knew neither was true did not help; it made it worse.
she hated moiraine almost as much as she hated liandrin and the black ajah,
maybe as much as she hated the seanchan.
she rounded a corner, and juilin sandar had to leap out of her way to keep
from being trampled. even used to them as he was, he nearly tripped over his
own clogs, only his staff saving him from falling on his face in the mud. that
pale, ridged wood was called bamboo, she had learned, and it was stronger
than it looked.
mistressuhmistress maryim, sandar said, regaining his balance. i
was . . . looking for you. he flashed her a nervous smile. are you angry?
why are you frowning at me that way?
she smoothed her forehead. i was not frowning at you, master sandar.
the butcher. . . . it does not matter. why are you looking for me? her breath
caught. have you found them?
he looked around as if he suspected the passersby of trying to listen. yes.
yes, you must come back with me. the others are waiting. the others. and
mother guenna.
why are you so nervous? you did not let them discover your interest?
she said sharply. what has frightened you?
no! no, mistress. ii did not reveal myself. his eyes darted again, and
he stepped closer, his voice dropping to a breathy, urgent whisper. these
women you seek, they are in the stone! guests of a high lord! the high
lord samon! why did you call them thieves? the high lord samon! he
almost squeaked. there was sweat on his face.
inside the stone! with a high lord! light, how do we reach them now? she
suppressed her impatience with an effort. be easy, she said soothingly. be
at ease, master sandar. we can explain everything to your satisfaction. i
hope we can. light, if he goes running to the stone to tell this high lord we


 are searching for them. . . . come with me to mother guennas house.
joslyn, caryla, and i will explain it all to you. truly. come.
he gave a short, uneasy nod, and walked alongside her, keeping his pace to
what she could manage with the clogs. he looked as if he wanted to run.
at the wise womans house, she hurried around to the back. no one ever
used the front door, that she had seen, not even mother guenna herself. the
horses were tied to a bamboo hitching rail, nowwell away from ailhuins
new figs as well as her vegetableswith their saddles and bridles stored
inside. for once she did not stop to pat gaidins nose and tell him he was a
good boy, and more sensible than his namesake. sandar halted to scrape mud
from his clogs with the butt of his staff, but she hurried inside.
ailhuin guenna was sitting in one of her highbacked chairs pulled out into
the room, her arms at her sides. the grayhaired womans eyes were bulging
with anger and fear, and she struggled furiously without moving a muscle.
nynaeve did not need to sense the subtle weaving of air to know what had
happened. light, theyve found us! burn you, sandar!
rage flooded her, washed away the walls inside that usually kept her from
the power, and as the basket fell from her hands, she was a white blossom on
a blackthorn bush, opening to embrace saidar, opening. . . . it was as if she
had run into another wall, a wall of clear glass; she could feel the true
source, but the wall stopped everything except the ache to be filled with the
one power.
the basket hit the floor, and as it bounced, the door behind her opened and
liandrin stepped in, followed by a blackhaired woman with a white streak
above her left ear. they wore long, colorful silk dresses cut to bare their
shoulders, and the glow of saidar surrounded them.
liandrin smoothed her red dress and smiled with that pouting rosebud
mouth. her dolls face was filled with amusement. you see, do you not,
wilder, she began, you have no
nynaeve hit her in the mouth as hard as she could. light, i have to get
away. she backhanded rianna so hard the blackhaired woman fell on her
silkcovered rump with a grunt. they must have the others, but if i can make it
out the door, if i can get far enough away they cant shield me, i can do
something. she pushed liandrin hard, shoving her away from the door. just
let me escape their shielding, and ill. . . .
blows hit her from every side, like fists and sticks, pummeling her. neither
liandrin, blood trickling from a corner of her nowgrim mouth, nor rianna,


 her hair as disarrayed as her green dress, lifted a hand. nynaeve could feel the
flows of air weaving about her as well as she could feel the blows
themselves. she still struggled to reach the door, but she realized that she was
on her knees, now, and the unseen blows would not stop, invisible sticks and
fists striking at her back and her stomach, her head and her hips, her
shoulders, her breasts, her legs, her head. groaning, she fell onto her side and
curled into a ball, trying to protect herself. oh, light, i tried. egwene! elayne!
i tried! i will not cry out! burn you, you can beat me to death, but i wont cry!
the blows stopped, but nynaeve could not stop quivering. she felt bruised
and battered from crown to toe.
liandrin crouched beside her, arms around her knees, silk rustling against
silk. she had wiped the blood away from her mouth. her dark eyes were hard,
and there was no amusement on her face now. perhaps you are too stupid to
know when you are defeated, wilder. you fought almost as wildly as that
other foolish girl, that egwene. she almost went mad. you must all learn to
submit. you will learn to submit.
nynaeve shivered and reached for saidar again. it was not that she had any
real hope, but she had to do something. forcing through her pain, she reached
out . . . and struck that invisible shield. liandrin did have amusement back in
her eyes, now, the grim mirth of a nasty child who pulls the wings off flies.
we have no use for this one, at least, rianna said, standing beside
ailhuin. i will stop her heart. ailhuins eyes nearly came out of her head.
no! liandrins short, honeycolored braids swung as her head snapped
around. always you kill too quickly, and only the great lord can make use
of the dead. she smiled at the woman held to the chair by invisible bonds.
you saw the soldiers who came with us, old woman. you know who waits
for us in the stone. the high lord samon, he will not be pleased if you speak
of what happened inside your house today. if you hold your tongue, you will
live, perhaps to serve him again one day. if you speak, you will serve only the
great lord of the dark, from beyond the grave. which do you choose?
suddenly ailhuin could move her head. she shook her gray curls, working
her mouth. i. . . . i will hold my tongue, she said dejectedly, then gave
nynaeve an embarrassed, shamed look. if i speak, what good will it do? a
high lord could have my head by raising an eyebrow. what good can i do
you, girl? what good?
it is all right, nynaeve said wearily. who could she tell? all she could do
is die. i know you would help if you could. rianna threw back her head and


 laughed. ailhuin slumped, released completely, but she only sat there, staring
at her hands in her lap.
between them, liandrin and rianna pulled nynaeve to her feet and pushed
her toward the front of the house. you give us any trouble, the blackhaired
woman said in a hard voice, and i will make you peel off your own skin and
dance in your bones.
nynaeve almost laughed. what trouble could i give? she was shielded
from the true source. her bruises ached so much she could barely stand.
anything she might do, they could handle like a childs tantrum. but my
bruises will heal, burn you, and youll make a slip yet! and when you do. . . .
there were others in the front room of the house. two big soldiers in
rimmed, round helmets and shiny breastplates over those puffysleeved red
coats. the two men had sweat on their faces, and their dark eyes rolled as if
they were as afraid as she. amico nagoyin was there, slender and pretty with
her long neck and pale skin, looking as innocent as a girl gathering flowers.
joiya byir had a friendly face despite that smoothcheeked calm of a woman
who had worked long with the power, almost a grandmothers face in its
welcoming appearance, though her age had put no touch of gray in her dark
hair, any more than it had wrinkled her skin. her gray eyes looked more like
those of the stepmother in the stories, the one who murdered the children of
her husbands first wife. both women shone with the power.
elayne stood between the two black sisters, with a bruised eye and a
swollen cheek and a split lip, one sleeve of her dress torn halfway off. i am
sorry, nynaeve, she said thickly, as if her jaw hurt. we never saw them until
it was too late.
egwene lay in a crumpled heap on the floor, her face swollen with bruises,
almost unrecognizable. as nynaeve and her escort came in, one of the big
soldiers hoisted egwene over his shoulder. she dangled there as limply as a
halfempty barley sack.
what did you do to her? nynaeve demanded. burn you, what!
something unseen struck her across the mouth hard enough to make her eyes
go blank for a moment.
now, now, joiya byir said with a smile that her eyes belied. i will not
stand for demands, or bad language. she sounded like a grandmother, too.
you speak when you are spoken to.
i told you the girl, she would not stop fighting, yes? liandrin said. let it
be a lesson to you. if you try to cause any trouble, you will be treated no more


 gently.
nynaeve ached to do something for egwene, but she let herself be pushed
out into the street. she made them push her; it was a small way of fighting
back, refusing to cooperate, but it was all she had at the moment.
there were few people in the muddy street, as if everyone had decided it
was much better to be somewhere else, and those few scurried by on the other
side without a glance at the shiny, blacklacquered coach standing behind a
team of six matched whites with tall white plumes on their bridles. a
coachman dressed like the soldiers, but without armor or sword, sat on the
seat, and another opened the door as they appeared from the house. before he
did, nynaeve saw the sigil painted there. a silvergauntleted fist clutching
jagged lightning bolts.
she supposed it was high lord samons signa darkfriend, he must be, if
he deals with the black ajah. the light burn him!but she was more
interested in the man who dropped to his knees in the mud at their
appearance. burn you, sandar, why? she jumped as something that felt
like a stick of wood struck her across the shoulders.
joiya byir smiled chidingly and waggled a finger. you will be respectful,
child. or you might lose that tongue.
liandrin laughed. tangling a hand in sandars black hair, she wrenched his
head back. he stared up at her with the eyes of a faithful houndor of a cur
expecting a kick. do not be too hard on this man. she even made man
sound like dog. he had to be . . . persuaded . . . to serve. but i am very
good at persuading, no? she laughed again.
sandar turned a confused stare on nynaeve. i had to do it, mistress
maryim. i . . . had to. liandrin twisted his hair, and his eyes went back to
her, the anxious hounds once more.
light! nynaeve thought. what did they do to him? what are they going to
do to us?
she and elayne were bundled roughly into the coach, with egwene
slumped between them, her head lolling, and liandrin and rianna climbed in
and took the seat facing forward. the glow of saidar still surrounded them.
where the others went, nynaeve did not much care at that moment. she
wanted to reach egwene, to touch her, to comfort her hurts, but she could not
move a muscle below her neck except to writhe. flows of air bound the three
of them like layers of tightly wrapped blankets. the coach lurched into
motion, swaying hard in the mud despite its leather springs.


 if you have hurt her. . . . light, i can see theyve hurt her. why dont i say
what i mean? but it was almost as hard to force the words out as it would
have been to lift a hand. if you have killed her, i wont rest till you are all
hunted down like wild dogs.
rianna glared, but liandrin only sniffed. do not be a complete fool,
wilder. you are wanted alive. dead bait will catch nothing.
bait? for what? for who? you are the fool, liandrin! do you think we
are here alone? only three of us, and not even full aes sedai? we are bait,
liandrin. and you have walked into the trap like a fat grouse.
do not tell her that! elayne said sharply, and nynaeve blinked before she
realized elayne was helping her fabrication. if you let your anger get the best
of you, you will tell them what they must not hear. they must take us inside
the stone. they must
be quiet! nynaeve snapped. you are letting your tongue run away with
you! elayne managed to look abashed behind her bruises. let them chew on
that, nynaeve thought.
but liandrin only smiled. once your time as bait is done, you will tell us
everything. you will want to. they say you will be very strong one day, but i
will make sure you will always obey me, even before the great master belal
works his plans for you. he is sending for myrddraal. thirteen of them.
those rosebud lips laughed the final words.
nynaeve felt her stomach twist. one of the forsaken! her brain numbed
with shock. the dark one and all the forsaken are bound in shayol ghul,
bound by the creator in the moment of creation. but the catechism did not
help; she knew too well how much of it was false. then the rest of it came
home to her. thirteen myrddraal. and thirteen sisters of the black ajah. she
heard elayne screaming before she realized she was screaming herself,
jerking uselessly in those invisible bonds of air. it was impossible to say
which was louder, their despairing screams, or the laughter from liandrin and
rianna.


 c h a p t e r
5 2


in search of a remedy


slumped on the stool in the gleemans room, mat grimaced as thom
coughed again. how are we going to keep looking if hes so bloody sick he
cant walk? he was ashamed as soon as he thought it. thom had been as
assiduous in searching as he had, pushing himself day and night, when he had
to know he was coming down sick. mat had been so absorbed in his hunt that
he had paid too little attention to thoms coughing. the change from constant
rain to steamy heat had not helped it.
come on, thom, he said. lopar says theres a wise woman not far.
that is what they call a wisdom herea wise woman. wouldnt nynaeve
like that!
i do not need . . . any foultasting . . . concoctions . . . poured down my
throat, boy. thom stuffed a fist through his mustaches in a vain attempt to
stop his hacking. you go ahead looking. just give me . . . a few hours . . . on
my bed . . . and ill join you. the wracking wheezes doubled him over till
his head was almost on his knees.
so i am supposed to do all the work while you take your ease? mat said
lightly. how can i find anything without you? you learn most of what we
hear. that was not exactly true; men talked as freely over dice as they did
while buying a gleeman a cup of wine. more freely than they did with a
gleeman hacking so hard they feared contagion. but he was beginning to
think that thoms cough was not going to go away by itself. if the old goat
dies on me, who will i play stones with? he told himself roughly. anyway,
your bloody coughing keeps me awake even in the next room.
ignoring the whitehaired mans protests, he pulled thom to his feet. he


 was shocked at how much of the gleemans weight he had to support. despite
the damp heat, thom insisted on his patchcovered cloak. mat had his own
coat unbuttoned completely and all three ties of his shirt undone, but he let the
old goat have his way. no one in the common room even looked up as he half
carried thom out into the muggy afternoon.
the innkeeper had given simple directions, but when they reached the gate,
and faced the mud of the maule, mat almost turned back to ask after another
wise woman. there had to be more than one in a city this size. thoms
wheezing decided him. with a grimace mat stepped off into the mud, half
carrying the gleeman.
he had thought from the directions that they must have passed the wise
womans house on their way up from the dock that first night, and when he
saw the long, narrow house with bunches of herbs hanging in the windows,
right next to a potters shop, he remembered it. lopar had said something
about going to the back door, but he had had enough of mud.
and the stink of fish, he thought, frowning at the barefoot men squelching
by with their baskets on their backs. there were tracks of horses in the street,
too, just beginning to be obliterated by feet and oxcarts. horses pulling a
wagon, or maybe a carriage. he had seen nothing but oxen drawing carts or
wagons either one in tearthe nobles and the merchants were proud of their
fine stock, and never let one be put to anything like workbut he had not
seen any carriages since leaving the walled city, either.
dismissing horses and wheel tracks from his mind, he took thom to the
front door and knocked. after a time he knocked again. then again.
he was on the point of giving up and returning to the white crescent
despite thom coughing on his shoulder when he heard shuffling footsteps
inside.
the door opened barely more than a crack, and a stout, grayhaired woman
peered out. what do you want? she asked in a tired voice.
mat put on his best grin. light, but i am getting sick myself at all these
people who sound like theres no bloody hope. mother guenna? my name is
mat cauthon. cavan lopar told me you might do something for my friends
cough. i can pay well.
she studied them a moment, seemed to listen to thoms wheezes, then
sighed. i suppose i can still do that, at least. you might as well come in. she
swung the door open and was already plodding toward the back of the house
before mat moved.


 her accent sounded so much like the amyrlins that he shivered, but he
followed, all but carrying thom.
i dont . . . need this, the gleeman wheezed. bloody mixtures . . . always
taste like . . . dung!
shut up, thom.
leading them all the way to the kitchen, the stout woman rummaged in one
of the cupboards, taking out small stone pots and packets of herbs while
muttering to herself.
mat sat thom down in one of the highbacked chairs, and glanced through
the nearest window. there were three good horses tied out back; he was
surprised the wise woman had more than one, or any for that matter. he had
not seen anyone in tear riding except nobles and the wealthy, and these
animals looked as if they had cost more than a little silver. horses again. i
dont care about bloody horses now!
mother guenna brewed some sort of strong tea with a rank smell and
forced it down thoms throat, holding his nose when he tried to complain.
mat decided she had less fat on her than he had thought, from the way she
held the gleemans head steady in the crook of one arm while she poured the
black liquid into him no matter how hard he tried to stop her.
when she took the cup away, thom coughed and scrubbed at his mouth
with equal vigor. gaaah! woman . . . i dont know . . . whether you . . . mean
to drown me . . . or kill me . . . with the taste! you ought . . . to be a bloody
. . . blacksmith!
you will take the same twice a day till that hacking is gone, she said
firmly. and i have a salve that youll rub on your chest every night. some
of the weariness left her voice as she confronted the gleeman, fists on her
broad hips. that salve stinks as bad as this tea tastes, but you will rub it on
thoroughly!or ill drag you upstairs like a scrawny carp in a net and tie you
to a bed with that cloak of yours! i never had a gleeman come to me before,
and ill not let the first one that does cough himself to death.
thom glowered and blew out his mustaches with a cough, but he seemed to
take her threat seriously. at least, he did not say anything, but he looked as if
he meant to throw her tea and her salve right back at her.
the more this mother guenna talked, the more she sounded like the
amyrlin to mat. from the sour look on thoms face, and the steady stare on
hers, he decided he had better smooth matters over a little before the gleeman


 refused to take her medicines. and she decided to make him. i knew a
woman once who talked like you, he said. all fish and nets and things.
sounded like you, too. the same accent, i mean. i suppose shes tairen.
perhaps. the grayhaired woman suddenly sounded tired again, and she
kept staring at the floor. i knew some girls with the sound of your speech on
their tongues, too. two of them had it, anyway. she sighed heavily.
mat felt his scalp prickle. my luck cant be this good. but he would not bet
a copper on two other women with two rivers accents just happening to be
in tear. three girls? young women? named egwene, and nynaeve, and
elayne? that one has hair like the sun, and blue eyes.
she frowned at him. those were not the names they gave, she said
slowly, yet i suspected they did not give me their true names. but they had
their reasons, i thought. one of them was a pretty girl with bright blue eyes
and redgold hair to her shoulders. she described nynaeve with her braid to
her waist and egwene with her big, dark eyes and ready smile, too. three
pretty women as different from one another as they could be. i see they are
the ones you know, she finished. i am sorry, boy.
why are you sorry? i have been trying to find them for days! light, i
walked right past this place the first night! right past them! i wanted random.
what could be more random than where a ship docks on a rainy night, and
where you happen to look in a bloody lightning flash? burn me! burn me!
tell me where they are, mother guenna.
the grayhaired woman stared wearily at the stove where her spouted kettle
was steaming. her mouth worked, but she said nothing.
where are they? mat demanded. it is important! they are in danger if i
dont find them.
you do not understand, she said softly. you are an outlander. the high
lords. . . .
i do not care about any mat blinked, and looked at thom. the
gleeman seemed to be frowning, but he was coughing so hard, mat could not
be sure. what do the high lords have to do with my friends?
you just do not
dont tell me i do not understand! i will pay for the information!
mother guenna glared at him. i do not take money for . . . ! she
grimaced fiercely. you ask me to tell you things i have been told not to speak


 of. do you know what will happen to me if i do and you breathe my name? i
will lose my tongue, to begin. then i will lose other parts before the high
lords have what is left of me hung up to scream its last hours as a reminder to
others to obey. and it will do those young women no good, not my telling or
my dying!
i promise i will never mention your name to anyone. i swear it. and ill
keep that oath, old woman, if you only tell me where they bloody are!
please? they are in danger.
she studied him for a long time; before she was done he had the feeling she
knew every detail of him. on that oath, i will tell you. i . . . liked them. but
you can do nothing. you are too late, matrim cauthon. too late by nearly
three hours. they have been taken to the stone. the high lord samon sent
for them. she shook her head in worried puzzlement. he sent . . . women
who . . . could channel. i hold nothing against aes sedai myself, but that is
against the law. the law the high lords made. if they break every other law,
they would not break that one. why would a high lord send aes sedai on his
errands? why would he want those girls at all?
mat almost burst out laughing. aes sedai? mother guenna, you had my
heart in my throat, and maybe my liver, too. if aes sedai came for them, there
is nothing to worry about. all three of them are going to be aes sedai
themselves. not that i like it much, but thats what they his grin faded at
the heavy way she shook her head.
boy, those girls fought like lionfish in a net. whether they mean to be aes
sedai or not, those who took them treated them like bilge pumpings. friends
do not give bruises like that.
he felt his face twisting. aes sedai hurt them? what in the light? the
bloody stone. it makes the palace in caemlyn look like walking into a
barnyard! burn me! i stood right out there in the rain and stared at this
house! burn me for a bloody lightblinded fool!
if you break your hand, mother guenna said, i will splint and poultice
it, but if you damage my wall, i will strip your hide like a redfish!
he blinked, then looked at his fist, at scraped knuckles. he did not even
remember punching the wall.
the broad woman took his hand in a strong grip, but the fingers she used to
probe were surprisingly gentle. nothing broken, she grunted after a while.
her eyes were just as gentle as she studied his face. it seems you care for
them. one of them, at least, i suppose it is. i am sorry, mat cauthon.


 dont be, he told her. at least i know where they are, now. all i have to
do is get them out. he fished out his last two andoran gold crowns and
pressed them into her hand. for thoms medicines, and for letting me know
about the girls. on impulse, he gave her a quick kiss on the cheek and a grin.
and thats for me.
startled, she touched her cheek, not seeming to know whether to look at the
coins or at him. get them out, you say. just like that. out of the stone.
abruptly she stabbed him in the ribs with a finger as hard as a tree stub. you
remind me of my husband, mat cauthon. he was a headstrong fool who
would sail into the teeth of a gale and laugh, too. i could almost think youll
manage it. suddenly she saw his muddy boots, apparently for the first time.
it took me six months to teach him not to track mud into my house. if you do
get those girls out, whichever of them you have your eye on will have a hard
time training you to make you fit to be let inside.
you are the only woman who could do that, he said with a grin that
broadened at her glare. get them out. thats all i have to do. bring them right
out of the stone of bloody tear. thom coughed again. he isnt going into the
stone like that. only, how do i stop him? mother guenna, can i leave my
friend here? i think he is too sick to go back to the inn.
what? thom barked. he tried to push himself out of the chair, coughing
so he could hardly speak. i am no . . . such thing, boy! you think . . . walking
into the stone . . . will be like . . . walking into your mothers kitchen? you
think you . . . would make it . . . as far as the gates . . . without me? he hung
on the back of the chair, his wheezing and hacking keeping him from rising
more than halfway to his feet.
mother guenna put a hand on his shoulder and pushed him back down as
easily as a child. the gleeman gave her a startled look. i will take care of
him, mat cauthon, she said.
no! thom shouted. you cannot . . . do this to me! you cant . . . leave
me . . . with this old. . . . only her hand on his shoulder kept him from
doubling over.
mat grinned at the whitehaired man. i have enjoyed knowing you,
thom.
as he hurried out into the street, he found himself wondering why he had
said that. he isnt going to bloody die. that woman will keep him alive if she
has to drag him kicking and screaming out of his grave by his mustaches. yes,
but who is going to keep me alive?


 ahead of him, the stone of tear loomed over the city, impregnable, a
fortress besieged a hundred times, a stone on which a hundred armies had
broken their teeth. and he had to get inside, somehow.
and bring out three women. somehow. with a laugh that made even the
sullen folk in the street look at him, he headed back for the white crescent,
uncaring of mud or the damp heat. he could feel the dice tumbling inside his
head.


 c h a p t e r
5 3


a flow of the spirit


perrin shrugged into his coat as he walked back toward the star through the
evening shadows. a good tiredness soaked through his arms and shoulders;
along with more common work, master ajala had had him make a large piece
of ornamental work, all elaborate curves and scrolls, to go on some country
lords new gate. he had enjoyed making something so pretty.
i thought his eyes would come out of his face, blacksmith, when you said
you would not make that thing if it was for a high lord.
he glanced sideways at zarine, walking beside him, the shadows masking
her face. even for his eyes, the shadows were there, just fainter than they
would have been for anothers. they emphasized her high cheekbones,
softened the strong curve of her nose. he just could not make up his mind
about her. even if moiraine and lan still insisted they stay close to the inn, he
wished she could find something else to do besides watch him work. for
some reason, he had found himself growing awkward whenever he thought of
her tilted eyes on him. more than once he had fumbled with his hammer till
master ajala frowned at him wonderingly. girls had always been able to
make him feel awkward especially when they smiled at him, but zarine did
not have to smile. only look. he wondered again if she was the beautiful
woman min had warned him against. better if she is the falcon. that thought
surprised him so much that he stumbled.
i did not want anything i make to get into the hands of one of the
forsaken. his eyes glowed golden as he looked at her. if it was for a high
lord, how could i tell where it might end? she shivered. i did not mean to
frighten you, faizarine.


 she smiled broadly, no doubt thinking he could not see her. you will fall
yet, farmboy. have you ever thought of wearing a beard?
it is bad enough shes always mocking me, but half the time i do not even
understand her!
as they reached the front door of the inn, moiraine and lan met them,
coming the other way. moiraine wore that linen cloak with the wide, deep
hood that hid her face. light from the commonroom windows made yellow
pools on the paving stones. two or three carriages rumbled past, and there
were perhaps a dozen people in sight, hurrying home for their suppers, but for
the most part, shadows populated the street. the weavers shop was closed
tight. the silence was deafening.
rand is in tear. the aes sedais cool voice issued from the depths of her
hood as from a cavern.
are you sure? perrin asked. i have not heard of anything strange
happening. no weddings, or wells drying up. he saw zarine frown in
confusion. moiraine had not been forthcoming with her, and neither had he.
keeping loials tongue silent had been more difficult.
dont you listen to rumors, blacksmith? the warder said. there have
been marriages, as many in the last four days as in half a year before. and as
many murders as in a whole year. a child fell from a tower balcony today. a
hundred paces onto stone paving. she got up and ran to her mother without a
bruise. the first of mayene, a guest in the stone since before the winter,
announced today that she will submit to the will of the high lords, after
saying yesterday she would see mayene and all its ships burn before one
tairen country lord set foot in the city. they had not brought themselves to
torture her, and that young woman has a will like iron, so you tell me if you
think it might be rands doing. blacksmith, from top to bottom, tear bubbles
like a cauldron.
these things were not needed to tell me, moiraine said. perrin, did you
dream of rand last night?
yes, he admitted. he was in the heart of the stone, holding that
swordhe felt zarine shift beside himbut i have been worrying about
that so much it is no wonder i dream of it. i had nothing but nightmares last
night.
a tall man? zarine said. with reddish hair and gray eyes? holding
something that shines so brightly it hurts your eyes? in a place that is all great
redstone columns? blacksmith, tell me that was not your dream.


 you see, moiraine said. i have heard this dream spoken of a hundred
times today. they all speak of nightmaresbelal apparently does not care to
shield his dreamsbut that one above all else. she laughed suddenly, like
low, cool chimes. people say he is the dragon reborn. they say he is
coming. they whisper it fearfully in corners, but they say it.
and what of belal? perrin asked.
moiraines reply was colddrawn steel. i will deal with him tonight.
there was no fear scent from her.
we will deal with him tonight, lan told her.
yes, my gaidin. we will deal with him.
and what do we do? sit here and wait? i had enough waiting to last me a
lifetime in the mountains, moiraine.
you and loialand zarinewill go to tar valon, she told him. until
this is done. it will be the safest place for you.
where is the ogier? lan said. i want all three of you on your way north
as soon as possible.
upstairs, i suppose, perrin said. in his room, or maybe the dining room.
there are lights in the windows up there. he is always working on those notes
of his. i suppose he will have plenty to say in his book about us running
away. he was surprised at the bitterness in his voice. light, fool, do you want
to face one of the forsaken? no. no, but i am tired of running. i remember
not running, once. i remember fighting back, and it was better. even if i
thought i was going to die, it was better.
i will find him, zarine announced. i have no shame in admitting i will
be glad enough to run from this fight. men fight when they should run, and
fools fight when they should run. but i had no need to say it twice. she
strode ahead of them, her narrow, divided skirts making small whisking
noises as they entered the inn.
perrin glanced around the common room as they followed her toward the
stairs in the back. there were fewer men at the tables than he expected. some
sat alone, with dull eyes, but where two or three sat together they talked in
frightened whispers his ears could barely catch. even so, he heard dragon
three times.
as he reached the top of the stairs, he heard another soft sound, a thump as
of something falling in the private dining room. he peered that way along the


 hall. zarine? there was no answer. he felt the hair on the back of his neck
shift, and padded that way. zarine? he pushed open the door. faile!
she was lying on the floor near the table. as he started to rush into the
room, moiraines commanding shout halted him.
stop, you fool! stop, for your life! she came along the hallway slowly,
head turning as if she were listening for something, or searching for
something. lan followed with his hand on his swordand a look in his eye as
if he already knew steel would do no good. she came abreast of the door and
stopped. move back, perrin. move back!
in agony he stared at zarine. at faile. she lay there as if lifeless. finally he
made himself step back from the door, leaving it open, standing where he
could see her. she looked as if she were dead. he could not see her chest stir.
he wanted to howl. frowning, he worked his hand, the one he had used to
push the door into the room, opening and closing his fingers. it tingled
sharply, as if he had struck his elbow. arent you going to do anything,
moiraine? if you will not, i am going to her.
stand still or you will go nowhere, she said calmly. what is that by her
right hand? as if it dropped from her grip when she fell. i cannot make it
out.
he glared at her, then peered into the room. a hedgehog. it looks like a
hedgehog carved out of wood. moiraine, tell me what is going on! what has
happened? tell me!
a hedgehog, she murmured. a hedgehog. be silent, perrin. i must think.
i felt it trigger. i can sense the residues of the flows woven to set it. spirit.
pure spirit, and nothing else. almost nothing uses pure flows of spirit! why
does that hedgehog make me think of spirit?
you felt what trigger, moiraine? what was set? a trap?
yes, a trap, she said, irritation making tiny cracks in her cool serenity. a
trap meant for me. i would have been first into that room if zarine had not
rushed ahead. lan and i would surely have gone there to plan and wait for
supper. i will not wait on supper now. be quiet, if you wish me to help the girl
at all. lan! bring me that innkeeper! the warder flowed away down the
stairs.
moiraine paced up and down in the hall, sometimes stopping to peer
through the door from the depths of her hood. perrin could see no sign that
zarine lived. her breast did not stir. he tried listening for her heartbeat, but


 even for his ears it was impossible.
when lan returned, shoving a frightened jurah haret ahead of him by the
scruff of his fat neck, the aes sedai rounded on the balding man. you
promised to keep this room for me, master haret. her voice was as hard, as
precise, as a skinning knife. to allow not even a serving woman to enter to
clean unless i was present. who did you let enter it, master haret? tell me!
haret shook like a bowl of pudding. oonly the ttwo ladies, mistress. tthey wwished to leave a surprise for you. i swear, mistress. tthey showed it
tto me. a little hhedgehog. tthey said you wwould be surprised.
i was surprised, innkeeper, she said softly. leave me! and if you
whisper a word of this, even in your sleep, i will pull this inn down and leave
only a hole in the ground.
yyes, mistress, he whispered. i swear it! i do swear!
go!
the innkeeper fell to his knees in his haste to reach the stairs, and went
scrambling down with thumps that suggested he fell more than once as he ran.
he knows i am here, moiraine told the warder, and he has found
someone of the black ajah to set his trap, yet perhaps he thinks i am caught
in it. it was a tiny flash of the power, but perhaps he is strong enough to have
sensed it.
then he will not suspect we are coming, lan said quietly. he almost
smiled.
perrin stared at them, his teeth bared. what about her? he demanded.
what was done to her, moiraine? is she alive? i cannot see her breathe!
she is alive, moiraine said slowly. i cannot, i dare not, go close enough
to her to tell much beyond that, but she is alive. she . . . sleeps, in a way. as a
bear sleeps in the winter. her heart beats so slowly you could count minutes
between. her breathing is the same. she sleeps. even from within that hood,
he could feel her eyes on him. i fear she is not there, perrin. not in her body
any longer.
what do you mean she is not in her body? light! you dont mean they . . .
took her soul. like the gray men! moiraine shook her head, and he drew a
relieved breath. his chest hurt as if he had not breathed since she last spoke.
then where is she, moiraine?
i do not know, she said. i have a suspicion, but i do not know.


 a suspicion, a hint, anything! burn me, where? lan shifted at the
roughness in his voice, but he knew he would try to break the warder like iron
over a hardy if the man tried to stop him. where?
i know very little, perrin. moiraines voice was like cold, unfeeling
music. i have remembered the little i know of what connects a carved
hedgehog with spirit. the carving is a terangreal last studied by corianin
nedeal, the last dreamer the tower had. the talent called dreaming is a
thing of spirit, perrin. it is not a thing i have ever studied; my talents lie in
other ways. i believe that zarine has been trapped inside a dream, perhaps
even the world of dreams, telaranrhiod. all that is her is inside that dream.
all. a dreamer sends only a part of herself. if zarine does not return soon,
her body will die. perhaps she will live on in the dream. i do not know.
there is too much you dont know, perrin muttered. he peered into the
room and wanted to cry. zarine looked so small, lying there, so helpless.
faile. i swear i will only call you faile, ever again. why dont you do
something!
the trap has been sprung, perrin, but it is a trap that will still catch anyone
who steps into that room. i would not reach her side before it took me. and i
have work i must do tonight.
burn you, aes sedai! burn your work! this world of dreams? is it like
the wolf dreams? you said these dreamers sometimes saw wolves.
i have told you what i can, she said sharply. it is time for you to go. lan
and i must be on our way to the stone. there can be no waiting, now.
no. he said it quietly, but when moiraine opened her mouth, he raised
his voice. no! i will not leave her!
the aes sedai took a deep breath. very well, perrin. her voice was ice;
calm, smooth, cold. remain if you wish. perhaps you will survive this night.
lan!
she and the warder strode down the hall to their rooms. in moments they
returned, lan wearing his colorchanging cloak, and vanished down the stairs
without another word to him.
he stared through the open door at faile. i have to do something. if it is like
the wolf dreams. . . .
perrin, came loials deep rumble, what is this about faile? the ogier
came striding down the hall in his shirtsleeves, ink on his fingers and a pen in
his hand. lan told me i had to go, and then he said something about faile, in


 a trap. what did he mean?
distractedly, perrin told him what moiraine had said. it might work. it
might. it has to! he was surprised when loial growled.
no! perrin, it is not right! faile was so free. it is not right to trap her!
perrin peered up at loials face, and suddenly remembered the old stories
that claimed ogier were implacable enemies. loials ears had laid back along
the sides of his head, and his broad face was as hard as an anvil.
loial, i am going to try to help faile. but i will be helpless myself while i
do. will you guard my back?
loial raised those huge hands that held books so carefully, and his thick
fingers curled as if to crush stone. none will pass me while i live, perrin.
not myrddraal or the dark one himself. he said it like a simple statement of
fact.
perrin nodded, and looked through the door again. it has to work. i dont
care if min warned me against her or not! with a snarl he leaped toward
faile, stretching out his hand. he thought he touched her ankle before he was
gone.
whether this dream of the trap was telaranrhiod or not, perrin did not
know, but he knew it for the wolf dream. rolling, grassy hills surrounded
him, and scattered thickets. he saw deer browsing at the edges of the trees,
and a herd of some sort of running animal bounding across the grass, like
brownstriped deer, but with long, straight horns. the smells on the wind told
him they were good to eat, and other scents spoke of more good hunting all
around him. this was the wolf dream.
he was wearing the blacksmiths long leather vest, he realized, with his
arms bare. and there was a weight at his side. he touched the axe belt, but it
was not the axe hanging from its loop. he ran his fingers over the head of the
heavy smiths hammer. it felt right.
hopper alighted in front of him.
again you come, like a fool. the sending was of a cub sticking its nose into
a hollow tree trunk to lap honey despite the bees stinging its muzzle and eyes.
the danger is greater than ever, young bull. evil things walk the dream. the
brothers and sisters avoid the mountains of stone the twolegs pile up, and
almost fear to dream to one another. you must go!


 no, perrin said. faile is here, somewhere, trapped. i have to find her,
hopper. i have to! he felt a shifting inside him, something changing. he
looked down at his curlyhaired legs, his wide paws. he was an even larger
wolf than hopper.
you are here too strongly! every sending carried shock. you will die, young
bull!
if i do not free the falcon, i do not care, brother.
then we hunt, brother.
noses to the wind, the two wolves ran across the plain, seeking the falcon.


 c h a p t e r
5 4


into the stone


the rooftops of tear were no place for a sensible man to be in the night, mat
decided as he peered into the moon shadows. a little more than fifty paces of
broad street, or perhaps narrow plaza, separated the stone from his tiled roof,
itself three stories above the paving stones. but when was i ever sensible? the
only people i ever met who were sensible all the time were so boring that
watching them could put you to sleep. whether the thing was a street or a
plaza, he had followed it all the way around the stone since nightfall; the only
place it did not go was on the river side, where the erinin ran right along the
foot of the fortress, and nothing interrupted it except the city wall. that wall
was only two houses to his right. so far, the top of the wall seemed the best
path to the stone, but not one he would be overjoyed to take.
picking up his quarterstaff and a small, wirehandled tin box, he moved
carefully to a brick chimney a little nearer the wall. the roll of fireworks
what had been the roll of fireworks before he worked on it back in his room
shifted on his back. it was more of a bundle, now, all jammed together as tight
as he could make it, but still too big for carrying around rooftops in the dark.
earlier, a slip of his foot because of the thing had sent a roof tile skittering
over the edge, and roused the man sleeping in a room below to bellow thief!
and send him running. he hitched the bundle back into position without
thinking about it, and crouched in the shadows of the chimney. after a
moment he set the tin box down; the wire handle was beginning to grow
uncomfortably warm.
it felt a little safer, studying the stone from the shadows, but not much
more encouraging. the city wall was not nearly as thick as those he had seen
in other places, in caemlyn or tar valon, no more than a pace wide,


 supported by great stone buttresses cloaked in darkness, now. a pace was
more than sufficient width for walking, of course, except that the fall to either
side was nearly ten spans. through the dark, to hard pavement. but some of
these bloody houses back right up against it, i can make it to the top easily
enough, and it bloody runs straight to the bloody stone!
it did that, but that was no particular comfort. the sides of the stone looked
like cliffs. eyeing the height again, he told himself he should be able to climb
it. of course, i can. just like those cliffs in the mountains of mist. over a
hundred paces straight up before there was a battlement. there must be
arrowslits lower down, but he could not make them out in the night. and he
could not squeeze through an arrowslit. a hundred bloody paces. maybe a
hundred and twenty. burn me, even rand would not try to climb that. but it
was the one way in he had found. every gate he had seen had been shut tight
and looked strong enough to stop a herd of bulls, not to mention the dozen or
so soldiers guarding very nearly every last one, in helmets and breastplates,
and swords at their belts.
suddenly he blinked, and squinted at the side of the stone. there was some
fool climbing it, just visible as a moving shadow in the moonlight, and over
halfway up already, with a drop of seventy paces to the pavement under his
feet. fool, is he? well, im as big a one, because i am going up, too. burn me,
hell probably raise an alarm in there and get me caught. he could not see
the climber anymore. who in the light is he? what does it matter who he is?
burn me, but this is a bloody way to win a wager. im going to want a kiss
from all of them, even nynaeve!
he shifted to peer toward the wall, trying to choose his spot to climb, and
suddenly there was steel across his throat. without thinking, he knocked it
away and swept the mans feet out from under him with his staff. someone
else kicked his own feet away and he fell almost on top of the man he had
knocked down. he rolled off onto the roof tiles, loosing the bundle of
fireworksif that falls into the street, ill break their necks!staff whirling;
he felt it strike flesh, and a second time, heard grunts. then there were two
blades at his throat.
he froze, arms outflung. the points of short spears, dull so they hardly
caught the faint light of the moon at all, pressed into his flesh just short of
bringing blood. his eyes followed them up to the faces of whoever was
holding them, but their heads were shrouded, their faces veiled in black
except for their eyes, staring at him. burn me, i have to run into real thieves!
what happened to my luck?


 he put on a grin, with plenty of teeth so they could see it in the moonlight.
i do not mean to trouble you in your work, so if you let me go my way, ill
let you go yours and say nothing. the veiled men did not move, and neither
did their spears. i want no more outcry than you. ill not betray you. they
stood like statues, staring down at him. burn me, i do not have time for this.
time to toss the dice. for a chilling moment he thought the words in his head
had been strange. he tightened his grip on the quarterstaff, lying out to one
side of himand almost cried out when someone stepped hard on his wrist.
he rolled his eyes to see who. burn me for a fool, i forgot the one i fell on.
but he saw another shape moving behind the one standing on his wrist, and
decided maybe it was as well he had not managed to bring the staff into use
after all.
it was a soft boot, laced to the knee, that rested on his arm. it tugged at his
memory. something about a man met in mountains. he eyed the nightcloaked shape the rest of the way up, trying to make out the cut and colors of
his clothesthey seemed all shadow, colors that blended with the darkness
too well to see them clearlypast a longbladed knife at the fellows waist,
right up to the dark veil across his face. a blackveiled face. blackveiled.
aiel! burn me, what are bloody aiel doing here! he had a sinking feeling in
his stomach as he remembered hearing that aiel veiled themselves when they
killed.
yes, said a mans voice, we are aiel. mat gave a start; he had not
realized he had spoken aloud.
you dance well for one caught by surprise, a young womans voice said.
he thought she was the one standing on his wrist. perhaps another day i will
have time to dance with you properly.
he started to smileif she wants to dance, they cant be going to kill me, at
least!then frowned instead. he seemed to remember aiel sometimes meant
something different when they said that.
the spears were pulled back, and hands hauled him to his feet. he shook
them away and brushed himself off as if he were standing in a common room
instead of on a nightcloaked rooftop with four aiel. it always paid to let the
other man know you had a steady nerve. the aiel had quivers at their waists
as well as knives, and more of those short spears on their backs with cased
bows, the long spear points sticking up above their shoulders. he heard
himself humming im down at the bottom of the well, and stopped it.
what do you do here? the mans voice asked. with the veils, mat was not


 entirely sure which one had spoken; the voice sounded older, confident, used
to command. he thought he could pick out the woman, at least; she was the
only one shorter than he, and that not by much. the others all stood a head
taller than he or more. bloody aiel, he thought. we have watched you for
some little time, the older man went on, watched you watch the stone. you
have studied it from every side. why?
i could ask the same of all of you, another voice said. mat was the only
one who gave a start as a man in baggy breeches stepped out of the shadows.
the fellow appeared to be shoeless, for better footing on the tiles. i expected
to find thieves, not aiel, the man went on, but do not think your numbers
frighten me. a slim staff no taller than his head made a blur and a hum as he
whirled it. my name is juilin sandar, and i am a thiefcatcher, and i would
know why you are on the rooftops, staring at the stone.
mat shook his head. how many bloody people are on the roofs tonight? all
that was needed was for thom to appear and play his harp, or someone to
come looking for an inn. a bloody thieftaker! he wondered why the aiel
were just standing there.
you stalk well, for a city man, the older mans voice said. but why do
you follow us? we have stolen nothing. why have you looked so often at the
stone tonight yourself?
even in the moonlight this sandars surprise was evident. he gave a start,
opened his mouthand closed it again as four more aiel rose out of the
dimness behind him. with a sigh, he leaned on his slender staff. it seems i
am caught myself, he muttered. it seems i must answer your questions. he
peered toward the stone, then shook his head. i . . . did a thing today that . . .
troubles me. he sounded almost as though he were talking to himself, trying
to puzzle it out. part of me says it was right, what i did, that i must obey.
surely, it seemed right when i did it. but a small voice tells me i . . . betrayed
something. i am certain this voice is wrong, and it is very small, but it will not
stop. he stopped then himself, shaking his head again.
one of the aiel nodded, and spoke with the older mans voice. i am
rhuarc, of the nine valleys sept of the taardad aiel, and once i was aethan
dor, a red shield. sometimes the red shields do as your thiefcatchers do. i
say this so you will understand that i know what it is you do, and the kind of
man you must be. i mean no harm to you, juilin sandar of the thiefcatchers,
nor to the people of your city, but you will not be suffered to raise the armcry.
if you will keep silence, you will live; if not, not.


 you mean no harm to the city, sandar said slowly. why are you here,
then?
the stone. rhuarcs tone made it plain that was all he meant to say.
after a moment sandar nodded, and muttered, i could almost wish you
had the power to harm the stone, rhuarc. i will hold my tongue.
rhuarc turned his veiled face to mat. and you, nameless youngling? will
you tell me now why you watch the stone so closely?
i just wanted a walk in the moonlight, mat said lightly. the young
woman put her spearpoint to his throat again; he tried not to swallow. well,
maybe i can tell them something of it. he must not let them know he was
shaken; if you let the other fellow know that, you lost whatever edge you
might have. very carefully, with two fingers, he moved her steel away from
him. it seemed to him that she laughed softly. some friends of mine are
inside the stone, he said, trying to sound casual. prisoners. i mean to bring
them out.
alone, nameless one? rhuarc said.
well, there doesnt seem to be anyone else, mat said dryly. unless you
care to help? you seem interested in the stone yourself. if you mean to go
into it, perhaps we could go together. it is a tight roll of the dice any way you
look at it, but my luck runs good. so far, anyway. ive run into blackveiled
aiel and they have not cut my throat; luck cannot get much better than that.
burn me, it would not be bad to have a few aiel along with me in there. you
could do worse than betting on my luck.
we are not here for prisoners, gambler, rhuarc said.
it is time, rhuarc. mat could not tell from which of the aiel that came,
but rhuarc nodded.
yes, gaul. he looked from mat to sandar and back. do not give the
armcry. he turned away, and in two steps he had blended into the night.
mat gave a start. the other aiel were gone, too, leaving him alone with the
thieftaker. unless they left somebody to watch us. burn me, how could i tell if
they did? i hope you dont mean to try stopping me, either, he told sandar
as he slung the bundle of fireworks on his back again and picked up his
quarterstaff. i mean to go inside, by you or through you, one way or the
other. he went over to the chimney to pick up the tin box; the wire handle
was more than warm, now.


 these friends of yours, sandar said. they are three women?
mat frowned at him, wishing there was enough light to show the mans
face clearly. the fellows voice sounded odd. what do you know of them?
i know they are inside the stone. and i know a small gate near the river
where a thiefcatcher can gain entrance with a prisoner, to take him to the
cells. the cells where they must be. if you will trust me, gambler, i can take
us that far. what happens after that is up to chance. perhaps your luck will
bring us out again alive.
i have always been lucky, mat said slowly. do i feel lucky enough to
trust him? he did not much like the idea of pretending to be a prisoner; it
seemed too easy for pretense to become reality. but it seemed no bigger risk
than trying to climb three hundred feet or more straight up in the dark.
he glanced toward the city wall, and stared. shadows flowed along it; dim
shapes trotting. aiel, he was sure. there must have been over a hundred. they
vanished, but now he could make out shadows moving on the cliff face that
was the sheer side of the stone of tear. so much for going up that way. that
one fellow earlier might have made it inside without raising an alarm
rhuarcs armcrybut a hundred or more aiel would have to be like sounding
bells. they might make a diversion, though. if they caused a commotion
somewhere up there, inside the stone, then whoever was guarding the cells
might not pay as much attention to a thieftaker bringing a thief.
i might as well add a little to the confusion. i worked hard enough on it.
very well, thieftaker. just dont decide i am a real prisoner at the last
minute. we can start for your gate as soon as i stir the anthill a bit. he
thought sandar frowned, but he did not mean to tell the man more than he had
to.
sandar followed him across the rooftops, climbing to higher levels as easily
as he did. the last roof was only a little lower than the top of the wall and ran
right up to it, a matter of pulling himself up rather than climbing.
what are you doing? sandar whispered.
wait here for me.
with the tin box dangling from one hand by its wire handle and his
quarterstaff held horizontally in front of him, mat took a deep breath and
started toward the stone. he tried not to think of how far it was to the
pavement below. light, the bloody thing is three feet wide! i could walk it
with a bloody blindfold, in my sleep! three feet wide, in the dark, and better


 than fifty feet to the pavement. he tried not to think about sandar not being
there when he came back, either. he was all but committed to this fool notion
of pretending to be a thief caught by the man, but it seemed all too probable
that he would return to the roof to find sandar gone, maybe bringing more
men to make him a prisoner in truth. dont think about it. just do the job at
hand. at least ill finally see what it is like.
as he had suspected, there was an arrowslit in the wall of the stone right at
the end of the wall, a deep wedge cut into the rock holding a tall, narrow
opening for an archer to shoot through. if the stone were attacked, the
soldiers inside would want some way to stop any trying to follow this path.
the slit was dark, now. there did not appear to be anyone watching. that was
something he had tried not to think about, too.
quickly he set down the tin box at his feet, balanced his quarterstaff across
the wall right against the side of the stone, and unslung the bundle from his
back. hurriedly he wedged it into the slit, forcing it in as far as he could; he
wanted as much of the noise to be inside as he could manage. pulling aside a
corner of the oiled cloth cover revealed knotted fuses. after a little thinking,
back in his room, he had cut the longer fuses to match the shortest, using the
pieces to help tie all the fuses together. it seemed they should all go off at
once, and a bangandflash like that should be enough to pull everyone who
was not completely deaf.
the lid of the tin box was hot enough that he had to blow on his fingers
twice before he could pry it offhe wished he had whatever aludras trick
had been, lighting that lantern so easilyto expose the dark bit of charcoal
inside, lying on a bed of sand. the wire handle came off to make tongs, and a
little blowing had the coal glowing red again. he touched the hot coal to the
knotted fuses, let tongs and coal fall over the side of the wall as the fuses
hissed into flame, snatched up his quarterstaff and darted back along the wall.
this is crazy, he thought as he ran. i dont care how big a bang it makes. i
could break my fool neck doing thi!
the roar behind him was louder than anything he had ever heard in his life;
a monstrous fist punched him in the back, knocking all the wind out of him
even before he landed, sprawled on his belly on the wall top, barely holding
on to his staff as it swung over the edge. for a moment he lay there, trying to
make his lungs work again, trying not to think how he must have used up all
his luck this time by not falling off the wall. his ears rang like all the bells in
tar valon.


 pushing himself up carefully, he looked back toward the stone. a cloud of
smoke hung around the arrowslit. behind the smoke, the shadowed shape of
the arrowslit itself seemed different. larger. he did not understand how or
why, but it did seem larger.
he only thought for a moment. at one end of the wall sandar might be
waiting, might be intending to take him into the stone as a pretend prisoner
or might be hurrying back with soldiers. at the other end of the wall, there
might be a way inside without any chance of sandar betraying him. he darted
back the way he had just come, no longer worrying about the darkness or the
drop to either side.
the arrowslit was larger, most of the thinner stone at the middle simply
gone, leaving a rough hole as if someone had hammered at it with a sledge for
hours. a hole just big enough for a man. how in the light? there was no time
for wondering.
he pushed through the jagged opening, coughing at the acrid smoke,
jumped to the floor inside, and had run a dozen steps before defenders of the
stone appeared, at least ten of them, all shouting in confusion. most wore
only their shirts, and none had helmet or breastplate. some carried lanterns.
some held bared swords.
fool! he shouted inside his head. this is why you set the bloody things off
in the first place! lightblinded fool!
he had no time to make it back out onto the wall. quarterstaff spinning, he
threw himself at the soldiers before they had a chance to do more than see he
was there, hurled himself into them, smashing at heads, swords, knees,
whatever he could reach, knowing they were too many for him to handle
alone, knowing that his fool toss of the dice had cost egwene and the others
whatever chance he might have had.
suddenly sandar was there beside him, in the light of lanterns dropped by
men clawing for their swords, his slender staff whirling even faster than mats
quarterstaff. caught between two staffmen, taken by surprise, the soldiers
went down like pins in a game of bowls.
sandar stared at the fallen men, shaking his head. defenders of the stone.
i have attacked defenders! they will have my head for! what was it that
you did, gambler? that flash of light, and thunder, breaking stone. did you
call lightning? his voice fell to a whisper. have i joined myself to a man
who can channel?
fireworks, mat said curtly. his ears were still ringing, but he could hear


 more boots coming, running boots thudding on stone. the cells, man! show
me the way to the cells before any more get here!
sandar shook himself. this way! he dashed down a side hall, away from
the oncoming boots. we must hurry! they will kill us if they find us!
somewhere above, gongs began to sound an alarm, and more thundered
echoes through the stone.
im coming, mat thought as he ran after the thieftaker. ill get you out or
die! i promise it!
the alarm gongs sent echoes crashing through the stone, but rand paid no
more attention to them than he had to the roar that had come before, like
muffled thunder from somewhere below. his side ached; the old wound
burned, strained almost to tearing by the climb up the side of the fortress. he
gave the pain no heed, either. a crooked smile was fixed on his face, a smile
of anticipation and dread he could not have wiped away if he had wanted to.
it was close, now. what he had dreamed of. callandor.
i will finish it at last. one way or another, it will be done with. the dreams,
finished. the baiting, and the taunting, and the hunting. ill finish it all!
laughing to himself, he hurried through the dark corridors of the stone of
tear.
egwene put a hand to her face, wincing. her mouth had a bitter taste, and she
was thirsty. rand? what? why was i dreaming about mat again, all mixed
with rand, and shouting that he was coming? what?
she opened her eyes, stared at the gray stone walls, one smoky rush torch
casting flickering shadows, and screamed as she remembered it all. no! i
will not be chained again! i wont be collared! no!
nynaeve and elayne were beside her in an instant, their bruised faces too
worried and fearful for the soothing sounds they made to be believed. but just
the fact that they were there was enough to still her screams. she was not
alone. a prisoner, but not alone. and not collared.
she tried to sit up, and they helped her. they had to help her; she ached in
every muscle. she could remember every unseen blow during the frenzy that
had all but driven her mad when she realized. . . . i will not think about that. i
have to think about how we are to escape. she slid backwards until she could


 lean against a wall. her pains fought with weariness; that struggle when she
had refused to give in had taken every last scrap of her strength, and the
bruises seemed to sap even more.
the cell was absolutely empty except for the three of them and the torch.
the floor was bare, and cold, and hard. the door of rough planks, splintered
as if countless futile fingers had clawed at it, was the only break in the walls.
messages had been scratched in the stone, most by unsteady hands. the light
have mercy and let me die, one read. she blanked that out of her head.
are we still shielded? she mumbled. even talking hurt. even as elayne
nodded, she realized she had not had to ask. the swollen cheek on the goldenhaired woman, her split lip and black eye, were answer enough, even if her
own pains had not been. if nynaeve had been able to reach the true source,
they surely would have been healed.
i have tried, nynaeve said despairingly. i have tried, and tried, and
tried. she gave her braid a sharp tug, anger seeping through despite the
hopeless fear in her voice. one of them is sitting outside. amico, that milkfaced chit, if they have not changed since we were thrown in here. i suppose
one is enough to maintain the shielding once it has been woven. she barked
a bitter laugh. for all the pains they tookand gave!to take us, you would
think we were of no importance at all. it has been hours since they slammed
that door behind us, and no one has come to ask a question, or look, or even
bring a drop of water. perhaps they mean to leave us here until we die of
thirst.
bait. elaynes voice quavered, though she was obviously trying to sound
unafraid. and failing miserably. liandrin said we are bait.
bait for what? nynaeve asked shakily. bait for who? if i am bait, id
like to shove myself down their throats till they choke on me!
rand. egwene stopped to swallow; even a drop of water would be
welcome. i dreamed about rand, and callandor. i think he is coming here.
but why did i dream of mat? and perrin? it was a wolf, but i am sure it was
him. do not be so afraid, she said, trying to sound confident. we will
escape them somehow. if we could better the seanchan, we can best
liandrin.
nynaeve and elayne exchanged looks over her. nynaeve said, liandrin
said thirteen myrddraal are coming, egwene.
she found herself staring at that message scratched on the stone wall again:
the light have mercy and let me die. her hands clenched into fists. her jaws


 cramped with the effort of not screaming those words. better to die. better
death than being turned to the shadow, made to serve the dark one!
she realized that one of her hands had tightened around the pouch at her
belt. she could feel the two rings inside, the small circle of the great serpent
and the larger, twisted stone ring.
they did not take the terangreal, she said wonderingly. she fumbled it
out of her pouch. it lay heavily on her palm, all stripes and flecks of color, a
ring with only one edge.
we were not even important enough to search, elayne sighed. egwene,
are you certain rand is coming here? i would much rather free myself than
wait for the chance of him, but if there is anyone who can defeat liandrin and
the rest of them, it must be him. the dragon reborn is meant to wield
callandor. he must be able to defeat them.
not if we pull him into a cage after us, nynaeve muttered. not if they
have a trap set he does not see. why are you staring at that ring, egwene?
telaranrhiod will not help us now. not unless you can dream a way out of
here.
perhaps i can, she said slowly. i could channel in telaranrhiod. their
shielding wont stop me reaching it. all i need do is sleep, not channel. and i
am surely weary enough to sleep.
elayne frowned, wincing as it pulled her bruises. i will take any chance,
but how can you channel even in a dream, cut off from the true source? and
if you can, how can it help us here?
i do not know, elayne. just because i am shielded here does not mean i
am shielded in the world of dreams. it is at least worth a try.
perhaps, nynaeve said worriedly. i will take any chance, too, but you
saw liandrin and the others the last time you used that ring. and you said
they saw you, too. what if they are there again?
i hope they are, egwene said grimly. i hope they are.
clutching the terangreal in her hand, she closed her eyes. she could feel
elayne smoothing her hair, hear her murmuring softly. nynaeve began to hum
that wordless lullaby from her childhood; for once, she felt no anger at it at
all. the soft sounds and touches soothed her, let her surrender to her
weariness, let sleep come.


 she wore blue silk this time, but she barely noticed more than that. soft
breezes caressed her unbruised face, and sent the butterflies swirling above
the wildflowers. her thirst was gone, her aches. she reached out to embrace
saidar and was filled with the one power. even the triumph she felt at
succeeding was small beside the surging of the power through her.
reluctantly she made herself release it, closed her eyes, and filled the
emptiness with a perfect image of the heart of the stone. that was the one
place in the stone she could picture aside from her cell, and how to
distinguish one featureless cubicle from another? when she opened her eyes,
she was there. but she was not alone.
the form of joiya byir stood before callandor, her shape so insubstantial
that the surging light of the sword shone through her. the crystal sword no
longer merely glittered with refracted light. in pulses it glowed, as if some
light inside it were being uncovered, then covered and uncovered again. the
black sister started with surprise and spun to face egwene. how? you are
shielded! your dreaming is at an end!
before the first words were out of the womans mouth, egwene reached for
saidar again, wove the complicated flow of spirit as she remembered it being
used against her, and cut joiya byir off from the source. the darkfriends
eyes widened, those cruel eyes so incongruous in that beautiful, kindly face,
but egwene was already weaving air. the other womans form might seem
like mist, but the bonds held it. it seemed to egwene that there was no effort
involved in holding both flows in their weaving. there was sweat on joiya
byirs forehead as she walked closer.
you have a terangreal! fear was plain on the womans face, but her
voice fought to hide it. that must be it. a terangreal that escaped us, and
one that does not require channeling. do you think it will do you any good,
girl? whatever you do here, it cannot affect what happens in the real world.
telaranrhiod is a dream! when i wake, i will take your terangreal from
you myself. be careful what you do, lest i have reason to be angry when i
come to your cell.
egwene smiled at her. are you certain you will wake, darkfriend? if your
terangreal requires channeling, why did you not wake as soon as i shielded
you? perhaps you cannot wake so long as you are shielded here. her smile
faded away; the effort of smiling at this woman was more than she could bear.
a woman once showed me a scar she received in telaranrhiod, darkfriend.
what happens here is still real when you wake.


 the sweat rolled down the black sisters smooth, ageless face, now.
egwene wondered if she thought she was about to die. she almost wished she
were cruel enough to do that. most of the unseen blows she had received had
come from this woman, like a pounding of fists, for no reason more than that
she had kept trying to crawl away, no reason more than that she had refused to
give up.
a woman who can give such beatings, she said, should have no
objections to a milder one. she wove another flow of air quickly; joiya
byirs dark eyes bulged in disbelief as the first blow landed across her hips.
egwene saw how to adjust the weaving so she did not have to maintain it.
you will remember this, and feel it, when you waken. when i allow you to
waken. remember this, too. if you ever even try to beat me again, i will
return you here and leave you for the rest of your life! the black sisters
eyes stared hate at her, but there was a suggestion of tears in them, too.
egwene felt a moment of shame. not at what she was doing to joiyathe
woman deserved every blow, if not for her own beating, then for the deaths in
the towernot that, not really, but because she had spent time on her own
revenge while nynaeve and elayne were sitting in a cell hoping against hope
that she might be able to rescue them.
she tied off and set the flows of her weavings before she knew she had
done it, then paused to study what she had done. three separate weavings,
and not only had it been no trouble to hold them all at once, but now she had
done something so they would maintain themselves. she thought she could
remember how, too. and it might be useful.
after a moment, she unraveled one of the weavings, and the darkfriend
sobbed as much from relief as from pain. i am not like you, egwene said.
this is the second time i have done something like this, and i do not like it. i
am going to have to learn to cut throats instead. from the black sisters face,
she thought egwene meant to start learning with her.
making a disgusted sound, egwene left her standing there, trapped and
shielded, and hurried into the forest of polished redstone columns. there had
to be a way down to the cells somewhere.
the stone corridor fell silent as the final dying scream was cut off by young
bulls jaws closing on the twolegss throat, crushing it. the blood was bitter
on his tongue.
he knew this was the stone of tear, though he could not say how he knew.


 the twolegs lying around him, one kicking his last with hoppers teeth
buried in his throat, had smelled rank with fear as they fought. they had
smelled confused. he did not think they had known where they werethey
certainly did not belong in the wolf dreambut they had been set to keep him
from that tall door ahead, with its iron lock. to guard it, at least. they had
seemed startled to see wolves. he thought they had been startled at being
there themselves.
he wiped his mouth, then stared at his hand with a momentary lack of
comprehension. he was a man again. he was perrin. back in his own body, in
the blacksmiths vest, with the heavy hammer at his side.
we must hurry, young bull. there is something evil near.
perrin pulled the hammer from his belt as he strode to the door. faile must
be here. one sharp blow shattered the lock. he kicked open the door.
the room was empty except for a long stone block in the middle of the
floor. faile lay on that block as if sleeping, her black hair spread out like a
fan, her body so wrapped in chains that it took him a moment to realize she
was unclothed. every chain was held to the stone by a thick bolt.
he was hardly aware of crossing the space until his hand touched her face,
tracing her cheekbone with a finger.
she opened her eyes and smiled up at him. i kept dreaming you would
come, blacksmith.
i will have you free in a moment, faile. he raised his hammer, smashed
one of the bolts as if it were wood.
i was sure of it. perrin.
as his name faded from her tongue, she faded, too. with a clatter, the
chains dropped to the stone where she had been.
no! he cried. i found her!
the dream is not like the world of flesh, young bull. here, the same hunt
can have many endings.
he did not turn to look at hopper. he knew his teeth were bared in a snarl.
again he raised the hammer, brought it down with all his strength against the
chains that had held faile. the stone block cracked in two under his blow; the
stone itself rang like a stuck bell.
then i will hunt again, he growled.


 hammer in hand, perrin strode out of the room with hopper beside him.
the stone was a place of men. and men, he knew, were crueler hunters than
ever wolves were.
alarm gongs somewhere above sent sonorous clangs down the corridor, not
quite drowning out the ring of metal on metal and the shouts of fighting men
rather closer. the aiel and the defenders, mat suspected. tall, golden lamp
stands, each with four golden lamps, lined the hall where mat was, and silk
tapestries of battle scenes hung on the polished stone walls. there were even
silk carpets on the floor, dark red on dark blue, woven in the tairen maze. for
once, mat was too busy to put a price on anything.
this bloody fellow is good, he thought as he managed to sweep a sword
thrust away from him, but the blow he aimed at the mans head with the other
end of the staff had to turn into another block of that darting blade. i wonder if
he is one of these bloody high lords? he almost managed a solid blow at a
knee, but his opponent sprang back, his straight blade raised on guard.
the blueeyed man certainly wore the puffysleeved coat, yellow with
threadofgold stripes, but it was all undone, his shirt only half tucked into his
breeches, and his feet bare. his shortcropped, dark hair was tousled, like that
of a man roused hastily from sleep, but he did not fight like it. five minutes
ago he had come darting out from one of the tall, carved doors that lined this
hall, a scabbardless sword in his hands, and mat was only grateful the fellow
had appeared in front of them and not behind. he was not the first man
dressed so that mat had faced already, but he was surely the best.
can you make it past me, thiefcatcher? mat called, careful not to take
his eyes off the man waiting for him with blade poised to strike. sandar had
insisted irritably on thiefcatcher, not thieftaker, though mat could not
see any difference.
i cannot, sandar called from behind him. if you move to let me by, you
will lose room to swing that oar you call a staff, and he will spit you like a
grunt.
like a what? well, think of something, tairen. this ragamuffin is grating
my nerves.
the man in the goldstriped coat sneered. you will be honored to die on
the blade of the high lord darlin, peasant, if i allow it so. it was the first
time he had deigned to speak. instead, i think i will have the pair of you
hung by the heels, and watch while the skin is stripped from your bodies


 i do not think id like that, mat said.
the high lords face reddened with indignation at being interrupted, but
mat gave him no time for any outraged comment. quarterstaff whirling in a
tight doubleloop weave, so quick the staff blurred at the ends, he leaped
forward. it was all a snarling darlin could do to keep the staff from him. for
the moment. mat knew he could not keep this up very long, and if he was
lucky then, it would all go back to to the strike and counterstrike. if he was
lucky. but he had no intention of counting on luck this time. as soon as the
high lord had a moment to set himself in a pattern of defense, mat altered
his attack in midwhirl. the end of the staff darlin had been expecting at his
head dipped instead to sweep his legs out from under him. the other end did
strike at his head then, as he fell, a sharp crack that rolled his eyes back up in
his head.
panting, mat leaned on his staff over the unconscious high lord. burn me,
if i have to fight one or two more like this, ill bloody well fall over from
exhaustion! the stories do not tell you being a hero is such hard work!
nynaeve always did find a way to make me work.
sandar came to stand beside him, frowning down at the crumpled high
lord. he does not look so mighty lying there, he said wonderingly. he
does not look so much greater than me.
mat gave a start and peered down the hall, where a man had just gone
trotting across along a joining corridor. burn me, if i did not know it was
crazy, i would swear that was rand!
sandar, you find that he began, swinging his staff up onto his shoulder,
and cut off when it thudded into something.
spinning, he found himself facing another halfdressed high lord, this one
with his sword on the floor, his knees buckling, and both hands to his head
where mats staff had split his scalp. hastily, mat poked him hard in the
stomach with the butt of the staff to bring his hands down, then gave him
another thump on the head to put him down in a heap on top of his sword.
luck, sandar, he muttered. you cannot beat bloody luck. now, why
dont you find this bloody private way the high lords take down to the
cells? sandar had insisted there was such a stairway, and using it would
avoid having to run through most of the stone. mat did not think he liked men
so eager to watch people put to the question that they wanted a quick route to
the prisoners from their apartments.
just be glad you were so lucky, sandar said unsteadily, or this one


 would have killed us both before we saw him. i know the door is here
somewhere. are you coming? or do you mean to wait for another high lord
to appear?
lead on. mat stepped over the unconscious high lord. i am no bloody
hero.
trotting, he followed the thiefcatcher, who peered at the tall doors they
passed, muttering that he knew it was here somewhere.


 c h a p t e r
5 5


what is written in prophecy


rand


entered the chamber slowly, walking among the great polished
redstone columns he remembered from his dreams. silence filled the
shadows, yet something called to him. and something flashed ahead, a
momentary light throwing back shadow, a beacon. he stepped out beneath a
great dome, and saw what he sought. callandor, hanging hilt down in midair,
waiting for no hand but that of the dragon reborn. as it revolved, it broke
what little light there was into splinters, and now and then it flared as if with a
light of its own. calling him. waiting for him.
if i am the dragon reborn. if i am not just some halfmad man cursed with
the ability to channel, a puppet dancing for moiraine and the white tower.
take it, lews therin. take it, kinslayer.
he spun to face the voice. the tall man with closecropped white hair who
stepped from the shadows among the columns was familiar to him. rand had
no idea who he was, this fellow in a red silk coat with black stripes down its
puffy sleeves and black breeches tucked into elaborately silverworked boots.
he did not know the man, but he had seen him in his dreams. you put them
in a cage, he said. egwene, and nynaeve, and elayne. in my dreams. you
kept putting them in a cage, and hurting them.
the man made a dismissive gesture of his hand. they are less than
nothing. perhaps one day, when they have been trained, but not now. i confess
surprise that you cared enough to make them useful. but you were ever a fool,
ever ready to follow your heart before power. you came too soon, lews
therin. now you must do what you are not yet ready for, or else die. die,
knowing you have left these women you care for in my hands. he seemed to
be waiting for something, expectant. i mean to use them more, kinslayer.


 they will serve me, serve my power. and that will hurt them far more than
anything they have suffered before.
behind rand, callandor flashed, throwing one pulse of warmth against his
back. who are you?
you do not remember me, do you? the whitehaired man laughed
suddenly. i do not remember you, either, looking this way. a country lad
with a flute case on his back. did ishamael speak the truth? he was ever one
to lie when it gained him an inch or a second. do you remember nothing,
lews therin?
a name! rand demanded. what is your name?
call me belal. the forsaken scowled when rand did not react to the
name. take it! belal snapped, throwing a hand toward the sword behind
rand. once we rode to war side by side, and for that i give you a chance. a
bare chance, but a chance to save yourself, a chance to save those three i
mean to make my pets. take the sword, countryman. perhaps it will be
enough to help you survive me.
rand laughed. do you believe you can frighten me so easily, forsaken?
baalzamon himself has hunted me. do you think i will cower now for you?
grovel before a forsaken when i have denied the dark one to his face?
is that what you think? belal said softly. truly, you know nothing.
suddenly there was a sword in his hands, a sword with a blade carved from
black fire. take it! take callandor! three thousand years, while i lay
imprisoned, it has waited there. for you. one of the most powerful saangreal
we ever made. take it, and defend yourself, if you can!
he moved toward rand as if to drive him back toward callandor, but rand
raised his own handssaidin filled him; sweet rushing flow of the power;
stomachwrenching vileness of the taintand he held a sword wrought from
red flame, a sword with a heronmark on its fiery blade. he stepped into the
forms lan had taught him till he flowed from one to the next as if in a dance.
parting the silk. water flows downhill. wind and rain. blade of black fire
met blade of red in showers of sparks, roars like whitehot metal shattering.
rand came back smoothly into a guard stance, trying not to let his sudden
uncertainty show. a heron stood on the black blade, too, a bird so dark as to
be nearly invisible. once he had faced a man with a heronmark blade of
steel, and barely survived. he knew that he himself had no real right to the
blademasters mark; it had been on the sword his father had given him, and
when he thought of a sword in his hands, he thought of that sword. once he


 had embraced death, as the warder had taught, but this time, he knew, his
death would be final. belal was better than he with the sword. stronger.
faster. a true blademaster.
the forsaken laughed, amused, swinging his blade in quick flourishes to
either side of him; the black fire roared as if swift passage through the air
quickened it. you were a greater swordsman, once, lews therin, he said
mockingly. do you remember when we took that tame sport called swords
and learned to kill with it, as the old volumes said men once had? do you
remember even one of those desperate battles, even one of our dire defeats?
of course not. you remember nothing, do you? this time you have not
learned enough. this time, lews therin, i will kill you. belals mockery
deepened. perhaps if you take callandor, you might extend your life a little
longer. a little longer.
he came forward slowly, almost as if to give rand time to do just that, turn
and race to callandor, to the sword that cannot be touched, to take it. but
the doubts were still strong in rand. callandor could only be touched by the
dragon reborn. he had allowed them to proclaim him so for a hundred
reasons that seemed to leave him no choice at the time. but was he truly the
dragon reborn? if he raced to touch callandor in truth, not in a dream,
would his hand meet an invisible wall while belal cut him down from
behind?
he met the forsaken with the sword he knew, the blade of fire wrought
with saidin. and was driven back. the falling leaf met watered silk. the
cat dances on the wall met the boar rushes downhill. the river undercuts
the bank nearly lost him his head, and he had to throw himself inelegantly to
one side with black flame brushing his hair, rolling to his feet to confront the
stone falls from the mountain. methodically, deliberately, belal drove him
back in a spiral that slowly tightened on callandor.
shouts echoed among the columns, screams, the clash of steel, but rand
barely heard. he and belal were no longer alone in the heart of the stone.
men in breastplates and rimmed helmets fought with swords against shadowy,
veiled shapes that darted among the columns with short spears stabbing.
some of the soldiers formed a rank; arrows flashing out of the dimness took
them in the throat, the face, and they died in their line. rand hardly noticed
the fighting, even when men fell dead within paces of him. his own fight was
too desperate; it took all of his concentration. wet warmth trickled down his
side. the old wound was breaking open.
he stumbled suddenly, not seeing the dead man at his feet until he was


 lying on his back atop his flute case on the stone floor.
belal raised his blade of black fire, snarling. take it! take callandor and
defend yourself! take it, or i will kill you now! if you will not take it, i will
slay you!
no!
even belal gave a start at the command in that womans voice. the
forsaken stepped back out of the arc of rands sword and turned his head to
frown at moiraine as she came striding through the battle, her eyes fixed on
him, ignoring the screaming deaths around her. i thought you were neatly out
of the way, woman. no matter. you are only an annoyance. a stinging fly. a
biteme. i will cage you with the others, and teach you to serve the shadow
with your puny powers, he finished with a contemptuous laugh, and raised
his free hand.
moiraine had not stopped or slowed while he spoke. she was no more than
thirty paces from him when he moved his hand, and she raised both of hers as
well.
there was an instant of surprise on the forsakens face, and he had time to
scream no! then a bar of white fire hotter than the sun shot from the aes
sedais hands, a glaring rod that banished all shadows. before it, belal
became a shape of shimmering motes, specks dancing in the light for less than
a heartbeat, flecks consumed before his cry faded.
there was silence in the chamber as that bar of light vanished, silence
except for the moans of the wounded. the fighting had stopped dead, veiled
men and men in breastplates alike standing as if stunned.
he was right concerning one thing, moiraine said, as coolly serene as if
she were standing in a meadow. you must take callandor. he meant to slay
you for it, but it is your birthright. better by far that you knew more before
your hand held that hilt, yet you have come to the point now, and there is no
further time for learning. take it, rand.
whips of black lightning curled around her; she screamed as they lifted her,
hurled her to slide along the floor like a sack until she came up against one of
the columns.
rand stared up at where the lightning had come from. there was a deeper
shadow up there, near the top of the columns, a blackness that made all other
shadows look like noonday, and from it, two eyes of fire stared back at him.
slowly the shadow descended, resolving into baalzamon, clothed in dead


 black, like a myrddraals black. yet even that was not so dark as the shadow
that clung to him. he hung in the air, two spans above the floor, glaring at
rand with a rage as fierce as his eyes. twice in this life i have offered you
the chance to serve me living. flames leaped in his mouth as he spoke, and
every word roared like a furnace. twice you have refused, and wounded me.
now you will serve the lord of the grave in death. die, lews therin
kinslayer. die, rand althor. it is time for you to die! i take your soul!
as baalzamon put forth his hand, rand pushed himself up, threw himself
desperately toward callandor, still glittering and flashing in midair. he did
not know whether he could reach it, or touch it if he did, but he was sure it
was his only chance.
baalzamons blow struck him as he leapt, struck inside him, a ripping and
crumpling, tearing something loose, trying to pull a part of him away. rand
screamed. he felt as if he were collapsing like an empty sack, as if he were
being turned inside out. the pain in his side, the wound taken at falme, was
almost welcome, something to hang on to, a reminder of life. his hand closed
convulsively. on callandors hilt.
the one power surged through him, a torrent greater than he could believe,
from saidin into the sword. the crystal blade shone brighter than even
moiraines fire had. it was impossible to look at, impossible any longer to see
that it was a sword, only that light blazed in his fist. he fought the flow,
wrestled with the implacable tide that threatened to carry him, all that was
really him, into the sword with it. for a heartbeat that took centuries he hung,
wavering, balanced on the brink of being scoured away like sand before a
flash flood. with infinite slowness the balance firmed. it was still as though
he stood barefoot on a razors edge above a bottomless drop, yet something
told him this was the best that could be expected. to channel this much of the
power, he must dance on that sharpness as he had danced the forms of the
sword.
he turned to face baalzamon. the tearing within him had ceased as soon
as his hand touched callandor. only an instant had passed, yet it seemed to
have lasted forever. you will not take my soul, he shouted. this time, i
mean to finish it once and for all! i mean to finish it now!
baalzamon fled, man and shadow vanishing.
for a moment rand stared, frowning. there had been a sense offolding
as baalzamon left. a twisting, as if baalzamon had in some way bent
what was. ignoring the men staring at him, ignoring moiraine crumpled at the


 column base, rand reached out, through callandor, and twisted reality to
make a door to somewhere else. he did not know to where, except that it was
where baalzamon had gone.
i am the hunter now, he said, and stepped through.
the stone shook under egwenes feet. the stone shook; it rang. she caught
her balance and stopped, listening. there was no more sound, no other tremor.
whatever had happened, it was over. she hurried on. a door of iron bars
stood in her way, with a lock as big as her head. she channeled earth before
she reached it, and when she pushed against the bars, the lock tore in half.
she walked quickly across the chamber beyond it, trying not to look at the
things hanging on the walls. whips and iron pincers were the most innocuous.
with a small shudder she pushed open a smaller iron gate and entered a
corridor lined with rough wooden doors, rush torches burning at intervals in
iron brackets; she felt almost as much relief at leaving those things behind as
she did at finding what she sought. but which cell?
the wooden doors opened easily. some were unlocked, and the locks on
the others lasted no longer than that larger lock had earlier. but every cell was
empty. of course. no one would dream themselves in this place. any prisoner
who managed to reach telaranrhiod would dream of a pleasanter place.
for a moment she felt something close to despair. she had wanted to
believe that finding the right cell would make a difference. even finding it
could be impossible, though. this first corridor stretched on and on, and
others joined it.
suddenly she saw something flicker just ahead of her. a shape even less
substantial than joiya byir had been. it had been a woman, though. she was
sure of that. a woman seated on a bench beside one of the cell doors. the
image flickered into being again, and was gone. there was no mistaking that
slender neck and the pale, innocentappearing face with its eyelids fluttering
on the edge of sleep. amico nagoyin was drifting toward sleep, dreaming of
her guard duties. and apparently toying drowsily with one of the stolen
terangreal. egwene could understand that; it had been a great effort to stop
using the one verin had given her, even for a few days.
she knew it was possible to cut a woman off from the true source even if
she had already embraced saidar, but severing a weave already established
had to be much harder than damming the flow before it began. she set the
patterns of the weaving, readied them, making the threads of spirit much


 stronger, this time, thicker and heavier, a denser weave with a cutting edge
like a knife.
the wavering shape of the darkfriend appeared again, and egwene struck
out with the flows of air and spirit. for an instant something seemed to resist
the weaving of spirit, and she forced it with all of her might. it slid into place.
amico nagoyin screamed. it was a thin sound, barely heard, as faint as she
herself was, and she seemed almost like a shadow of what joiya byir had
been. yet the bonds woven of air held her; she did not vanish again. terror
twisted the darkfriends lovely face; she seemed to be babbling, but her
shouts were whispers too soft for egwene to understand.
tying and setting the weaves around the black sister, egwene turned her
attentions to the cell door. impatiently, she let earth flood into the iron lock. it
fell away in black dust, in a mist that dissolved completely before it struck the
floor. she swung open the door, and was not surprised to find the cell empty
except for one burning rush torch.
but amico is bound, and the door is open.
for a moment she thought of what to do next. then she stepped out of the
dream . . .
. . . and woke to all her bruises and aches and thirst, to the wall of the cell
against her back, staring at the tightly shut cell door. of course. what happens
to living things there is real when they wake. what i did to stone or iron or
wood has no effect in the waking world.
nynaeve and elayne were still kneeling beside her.
whoever is out there, nynaeve said, screamed a few moments ago, but
nothing else has happened. did you find a way out?
we should be able to walk out, egwene said. help me to my feet, and i
will get rid of the lock. amico will not trouble us. that scream was her.
elayne shook her head. i have been trying to embrace saidar ever since
you left. it is different, now, but i am still cut off.
egwene formed the emptiness inside her, became the rosebud opening to
saidar. the invisible wall was still there. it shimmered now. there were
moments when she almost thought she could feel the true source beginning
to fill her with the power. almost. the shield wavered in and out of existence
too fast for her to detect. it might as well have still been solid.


 she stared at the other two women. i bound her. i shielded her. she is a
living thing, not lifeless iron. she must be shielded still.
something has happened to the shield set on us, elayne said, but amico
is still managing to hold it.
egwene let her head sag back against the wall. i will have to try again.
are you strong enough? elayne grimaced. to be blunt, you sound even
weaker than you did before. this try took something out of you, egwene.
i am strong enough there. she did feel more weary, less strong, but it was
their only chance that she could see. she said as much, and their faces said
they agreed with her, however reluctantly.
can you go to sleep again so soon? nynaeve asked finally.
sing to me. egwene managed a smile. like when i was a little girl.
please? holding nynaeves hand with one of hers, the stone ring clasped in
the other, she closed her eyes and tried to find sleep in the wordless humming
tune.
the wide door of iron bars stood open, and the room beyond seemed empty of
life, but mat entered cautiously. sandar was still out in the hall, trying to peer
both ways at once, certain that a high lord, or maybe a hundred defenders or
so, would appear at any moment.
there were no men in the room nowand by the looks of the halfeaten
meals on a long table, they had left hurriedly; no doubt because of the fighting
aboveand from the looks of the things on the walls, he was just as glad he
did not have to meet any of them. whips in different sizes and lengths,
different thicknesses, with different numbers of tails. pincers, and tongs, and
clamps, and irons. things that looked like metal boots, and gauntlets, and
helmets, with great screws all over them as if to tighten them down. things he
could not even begin to guess the use of. if he had met the men who used
these things, he thought he would surely have checked that they were dead
before he walked away.
sandar! he hissed. are you going to stay out there all bloody night! he
hurried to the inner doorbarred like the outer, but smallerwithout waiting
for an answer, and went through.
the hall beyond was lined by rough wooden doors, and lit by the same rush
torches as the room he had just left. no more than twenty paces from him, a


 woman sat on a bench beside one of the doors, leaning back against the wall
in a curiously stiff fashion. she turned her head slowly toward him at the
sound of his boots grating on the stone. a pretty young woman. he wondered
why she did not move more than her head, and why even that moved as if she
were halfasleep.
was she a prisoner? out in the hall? but nobody with a face like that could
be one of the people who uses the things on those walls. she did look almost
asleep, with her eyes only partly open. and the suffering on that lovely face
surely made her one of the tortured, not a torturer.
stop! sandar shouted behind him. she is aes sedai! she is one of those
who took the women you seek!
mat froze in the middle of a step, staring at the woman. he remembered
moiraine hurling balls of fire. he wondered if he could deflect a ball of fire
with his quarterstaff. he wondered if his luck extended to outrunning aes
sedai.
help me, she said faintly. her eyes still looked nearly asleep, but the
pleading in her voice was fully awake. help me. please!
mat blinked. she still had not moved a muscle below her neck. cautiously,
he stepped closer, waving to sandar to stop his groaning about her being aes
sedai. she moved her head to follow him. no more than that.
a large iron key hung at her belt. for a moment he hesitated. aes sedai,
sandar said. why doesnt she move? swallowing, he eased the key free as
carefully as if he were trying to take a piece of meat from a wolfs jaws. she
rolled her eyes toward the door beside her and made a sound like a cat that
had just seen a huge dog come snarling into the room and knew there was no
way out.
he did not understand it, but as long as she did not try to stop him opening
that door, he did not care why she just sat there like a stuffed scarecrow. on
the other hand, he wondered if there was something on the other side worth
being afraid of. if she is one of those who took egwene and the others, it
stands to reason shes guarding them. tears leaked from the womans eyes.
only she looks like its a bloody halfman in there. but there was only one
way to find out. propping his staff against the wall, he turned the key in the
lock and flung open the door, ready to run if need be.
nynaeve and elayne were kneeling on the floor with egwene apparently
asleep between them. he gasped at the sight of egwenes swollen face, and
changed his mind about her sleeping. the other two women turned toward


 him as he opened the doorthey were almost as battered as egwene; burn
me! burn me!looked at him, and gaped.
matrim cauthon, nynaeve said, sounding shocked, what under the
light are you doing here?
i came to bloody rescue you, he said. burn me if i expected to be
greeted as if i had come to steal a pie. you can tell me why you look as if
youd been fighting bears later, if you want. if egwene cannot walk, ill carry
her on my back. there are aiel all over the stone, or near enough, and either
they are killing the bloody defenders or the bloody defenders are killing
them, but whichever way it is, we had better get out of here while we bloody
well can. if we can!
mind your language, nynaeve told him, and elayne gave him one of
those disapproving stares women were so good at. neither one seemed to
have her full attention in it, though. they began shaking egwene as if she
were not covered with more bruises than he had ever seen in his life.
egwenes eyelids fluttered open, and she groaned. why did you wake me?
i must understand it. if i loose the bonds on her, she will wake and ill never
catch her again. but if i do not, she cannot go all the way to sleep, and her
eyes fell on him and widened. matrim cauthon, what under the light are you
doing here?
you tell her, he told nynaeve. i am too busy trying to rescue you to
watch my langu they were all staring beyond him, glaring as if they
wished they had knives in their hands.
he spun, but all he saw was juilin sandar, looking as if he had swallowed a
rotten plum whole.
they have cause, he told mat. i. . . . i betrayed them. but i had to.that
was addressed past mat to the women. the one with many honeycolored
braids spoke to me, and i. . . . i had to do it. for a long moment the three
continued to stare.
liandrin has vile tricks, master sandar, nynaeve said finally. perhaps
you are not entirely to blame. we can apportion guilt later.
if that is all cleared up, mat said, could we go now? it was as clear as
mud to him, but he was more interested in leaving right then.
the three women limped after him into the hall, but they stopped around
the woman on the bench. she rolled her eyes at them and whimpered. please.
i will come back to the light. i will swear to obey you. with the oath rod in


 my hands i will swear. please do not
mat jumped as nynaeve suddenly reared back and swung a fist, knocking
the woman completely off the bench. she lay there, her eyes closed all the
way finally, but even lying on her side she was still in exactly the same
position she had been in on the bench.
it is gone, elayne said excitedly.
egwene bent to rummage in the unconscious womans pouch, transferring
something mat could not make out to her own. yes. it feels wonderful.
something changed about her when you hit her, nynaeve. i do not know
what, but i felt it.
elayne nodded. i felt it, too.
i would like to change every last thing about her, nynaeve said grimly.
she took egwenes head in her hands; egwene rose onto her toes, gasping.
when nynaeve took her hands away to put them on elayne, egwenes bruises
were gone. elaynes vanished as quickly.
blood and bloody ashes! mat growled. what do you mean hitting a
woman who was just sitting there? i dont think she could even move! they
all three turned to look at him, and he made a strangled sound as the air
seemed to turn to thick jelly around him. he lifted into the air, until his boots
dangled a good pace above the floor. oh, burn me, the power! here i was
afraid that aes sedai would use the bloody power on me, and now the bloody
women im rescuing do it! burn me!
you do not understand anything, matrim cauthon, egwene said in a tight
voice.
until you do understand, nynaeve said in an even tighter, i suggest you
keep your opinions to yourself.
elayne contented herself with a glare that made him think of his mother
going out to cut a switch.
for some reason he found himself giving them the grin that had so often
sent his mother after that switch. burn me, if they can do this, i dont see how
anybody ever locked them in that cell in the first place! what i understand is
that i got you out of something you couldnt get yourselves out of, and you all
have as much gratitude as a bloody taren ferry man with a toothache!
you are right, nynaeve said, and his boots suddenly hit the floor so hard
his teeth jarred. but he could move again. as much as it pains me to say it,


 mat, you are right.
he was tempted to answer something sarcastic, but there was barely
enough apology in her voice as it was. now can we go? with the fighting
going on, sandar thinks he and i can take you out by a small gate near the
river.
i am not leaving just yet, mat, nynaeve said. i mean to find liandrin
and skin her, egwene said, sounding almost as if she meant it literally.
all i want to do, elayne said, is pound joiya byir till she squeals, but i
will settle for any of them.
are you all deaf? he growled. there is a battle going on out there! i
came here to rescue you, and i mean to rescue you. egwene patted his cheek
as she walked by him, and so did elayne. nynaeve merely sniffed. he stared
after them with his mouth hanging open. why didnt you say something? he
growled at the thiefcatcher.
i saw what speaking earned you, sandar said simply. i am no fool.
well, i am not staying in the middle of a battle! he shouted at the women.
they were just disappearing through the small, barred door. i am leaving, do
you hear? they did not even look back. probably get themselves killed out
there! somebody will stick a sword in them while theyre looking the other
way! with a snarl, he put his quarterstaff across his shoulder and started after.
are you going to stand there? he called to the thiefcatcher. i did not come
this far to let them die now!
sandar caught up to him in the room with the whips. the three women
were already gone, but mat had a feeling they would not be too hard to find.
just find the men bloody hanging in midair! bloody women! he quickened his
pace to a trot.
perrin strode down the halls of the stone grimly, searching for some sign of
faile. he had rescued her twice more, now, breaking her out of an iron cage
once, much like the one that had held the aiel in remen, and once breaking
open a steel chest with a falcon worked on its side. both times she had melted
into air after saying his name. hopper trotted by his side, sniffing the air. as
sharp as perrins nose was, the wolfs was sharper; it had been hopper who
led them to the chest.
perrin wondered whether he was ever going to free her in truth. there had
not been any sign in a long time, it seemed. the halls of the stone were


 empty, lamps burning, tapestries and weapons hanging on the walls, but
nothing moved except himself and hopper. except i think that was rand. it
had only been a glimpse, a man running as if chasing someone. it could not be
him. it couldnt, but i think it was.
hopper quickened his steps suddenly, heading for another set of tall doors,
these clad in bronze. perrin tried to match the pace, stumbled, and fell to his
knees, throwing out a hand to catch himself short of dropping on his face.
weakness washed through him as if all his muscles had gone to water. even
after the feeling receded, it took some of his strength with it. it was an effort
to struggle to his feet. hopper had turned to look at him.
you are here too strongly, young bull. the flesh weakens. you do not care
to hold on to it enough. soon flesh and dream will die together.
find her, perrin said. that is all i ask. find faile.
yellow eyes met yellow eyes. the wolf turned and trotted to the doors.
beyond here, young bull.
perrin reached the doors and pushed. they did not budge. there seemed to
be no way to open them, no handles, nothing to grip. there was a tiny pattern
worked into the metal, so fine his eyes almost did not see it. falcons.
thousands of tiny falcons.
she has to be here. i do not think i can last much longer. with a shout, he
swung his hammer against the bronze. it rang like a great gong. again he
struck, and the peal deepened. a third blow, and the bronze doors shattered
like glass.
within, a hundred paces from the broken doors, a circle of light surrounded
a falcon chained to a perch. darkness filled all the rest of that vast chamber,
darkness and faint rustlings as of hundreds of wings.
he took a step into the room, and a falcon stooped out of the murk, talons
scoring his face as it passed. he threw an arm across his eyestalons tore at
his forearmand staggered toward the perch. again and again the birds
came, falcons diving, striking him, tearing him, but he lumbered on with
blood pouring down his arms and shoulders, that one arm protecting the eyes
he had fixed on the falcon on the perch. he had lost the hammer; he did not
know where, but he knew that if he went back to search, he would die before
he found it.
as he reached the perch, the slicing talons drove him to his knees. he
peered up under his arm at the falcon on the perch, and she stared back with


 dark, unblinking eyes. the chain that held her leg was fastened to the perch
with a tiny lock shaped like a hedgehog. he seized the chain with both hands,
careless of the other falcons that now became a whirlwind of cutting talons
around him, and with his last strength snapped it. pain and the falcons brought
darkness.
he opened his eyes to stinging agony, as if his face and arms and shoulders
had been sliced with a thousand knives. it did not matter. faile was kneeling
over him, those dark, tilted eyes filled with worry, wiping his face with a cloth
already soaked in his blood.
my poor perrin, she said softly. my poor blacksmith. you are hurt so
badly.
with an effort that cost more pain, he turned his head. this was the private
dining room in the star, and near one leg of the table lay a wooden carving of
a hedgehog, broken in half. faile, he whispered to her. my falcon.
rand was still in the heart of the stone, but it was different. there were no
men fighting here, no dead men, no one at all but himself. abruptly the sound
of a great gong rang through the stone, then again, and the very stones
beneath his feet resonated. a third time the booming came, but cut off
abruptly, as if the gong had shattered. all was still.
where is this place? he wondered. more important, where is baalzamon?
as if to answer him, a blazing shaft like the one moiraine had made shot
out of the shadows among the columns, straight toward his chest. his wrist
twisted the sword instinctively; it was instinct as much as anything else that
made him loose flows from saidin into callandor, a flood of the power that
made the sword blaze brighter even than that bar streaking at him. his
uncertain balance between existence and destruction wavered. surely that
torrent would consume him.
the shaft of light struck the blade of callandorand parted on its edge,
forking to stream past on either side. he felt his coat singe from its near
passage, smelled the wool beginning to burn. behind him, the two prongs of
frozen fire, of liquid light, struck huge redstone columns; where they struck,
stone ceased to exist, and the burning bars bored through to other columns,
severing those instantaneously as well. the heart of the stone rumbled as
columns fell and shattered in clouds of dust, sprays of stone fragments. what


 fell into the light, however, simplywas not, anymore.
a snarl of rage came from the shadows, and the blazing shaft of pure white
heat vanished.
rand swung callandor as if he were striking at something in front of him.
the white light obscuring the blade extended, blazed ahead, and sheared
through the redstone column that hid the snarl. the polished stone sliced like
silk. the severed column trembled; part of it tore loose and dropped from the
ceiling, smashing into huge, jagged chunks on the floor. as the rumbling
faded, he heard beyond it the sound of boots on stone. running.
callandor at the ready, rand hurried after baalzamon.
the tall archway leading out of the heart collapsed as he reached it, the
entire wall falling in clouds of dust and rock as if to bury him, but he threw
the power at it, and all became dust floating in the air. he ran on. he was not
sure what he had done, or how, but he had no time to think on it. he ran after
baalzamons retreating footsteps, echoing down the halls of the stone.
myrddraal and trollocs leaped out of thin air, huge bestial shapes and
eyeless faces distorted with a rage to kill, in hundreds, so they jammed the
hall before him and behind, scythe like swords and blades of deadly black
steel seeking his blood. without knowing how, he turned them to vapor that
parted before himand vanished. the air around him suddenly became
choking soot, clogging his nostrils, shutting off breath, but he made it fresh
air again, a cool mist. flames leaped from the floor beneath his feet, spurted
from the walls, the ceiling, furious jets that flashed tapestries and rugs, tables
and chests to wisps of ash, flung ornaments and lamps ahead of them as drops
of molten, burning gold; he smashed the fires flat, hardened them into a red
glaze on the rock.
the stones around him faded almost to mist; the stone faded. reality
trembled; he could feel it unraveling, feel himself unraveling. he was being
pushed out of the here, into some other place where nothing existed at all.
callandor blazed in his hands like the sun till he thought it would melt. he
thought he himself would melt from the surge of the one power through him,
the flood that he somehow directed into sealing up the hole that had opened
around him, into holding himself on the side of existence. the stone became
solid again.
he could not even begin to imagine what it was that he did. the one power
raged inside him till he barely knew himself, till he barely was himself, till
what was himself almost did not exist. his precarious stability teetered. to


 either side lay the endless fall, obliteration by the power that coursed through
him into the sword. only in the dance along the razors sharp edge was there
even an uncertain safety. callandor shone in his fist until it seemed he carried
the sun. dimly within him, fluttering like a candle flame in a storm, was the
surety that holding callandor, he could do anything. anything.
through endless corridors he ran, dancing along the razor, chasing the one
who would slay him, the one he must slay. there could be no other end, this
time. this time one of them must die! that baalzamon knew it as well was
clear. always he fled, always staying ahead of sight so that only the sounds of
his flight drew rand on, but even fleeing he turned this stone of tear that was
not the stone of tear against rand, and rand fought back with instinct and
guesses and chance, fought and ran down that knife edge in perfect balance
with the power, the tool and weapon that would consume him utterly if he
faltered.
water filled the halls from top to bottom, thick and black as the bottom of
the sea, choking off breath. he made it air again, unknowingly, and ran on,
and suddenly the air gained weight until it seemed every inch of his skin
supported a mountain, squeezing in from all directions. in the instant before
he was crushed to nothingness he chose tides out of the flood of power raging
through himhe did not know how or which or why; it was too fast for
thought or knowingand the pressure vanished. he pursued baalzamon, and
the very air was abruptly solid rock encasing him, then molten stone, then
nothing at all to fill his lungs. the ground beneath his boots pulled at him as if
every pound suddenly weighed a thousand, then all weight vanished so that a
step left him spinning in midair. unseen maws gaped to rip his mind from his
body, to tear away his soul. he sprang each trap and ran on; what baalzamon
twisted to destroy him, he made right without being aware of how. vaguely he
knew that in some way he had brought things back into natural balance,
forced them into line with his own dance down that impossibly thin divide
between existence and nothingness, but that knowledge was distant. all his
awareness lay in the pursuit, the hunt, the death that must end it.
and then he was in the heart of the stone again, stalking through the
rubbled gap that had been a wall. some of the columns hung like broken
teeth, now. and baalzamon backed away from him, eyes burning, shadow
cloaking him. black lines like steel wires seemed to run off from baalzamon
into the darkness mounding around him, vanishing into unimaginable heights
and distances within that blackness.
i will not be undone! baalzamon cried. his mouth was fire; his shriek


 echoed among the columns. i cannot be defeated! aid me! some of the
darkness shrouding him drifted into his hands, formed into a ball so black it
seemed to soak up even the light of callandor. sudden triumph blazed in the
flames of his eyes.
you are destroyed! rand shouted. callandor spun in his hands. its light
roiled the darkness, severed the steelblack lines around baalzamon, and
baalzamon convulsed. as if there were two of him he seemed to dwindle and
grow larger at the same time. you are undone! rand plunged the shining
blade into baalzamons chest.
baalzamon screamed, and the fires of his face flared wildly. fool! he
howled. the great lord of the dark can never be defeated!
rand pulled callandors blade free as baalzamons body sagged and
began to fall, the shadow around him vanishing.
and suddenly rand was in another heart of the stone, surrounded by
columns still whole, and fighting men screaming and dying, veiled men and
men in breastplates and helmets. moiraine still lay crumpled at the base of a
redstone column. and at rands feet lay the body of a man, sprawled on its
back with a hole burned through the chest. he might have been a handsome
man in his middle years, except that where his eyes and mouth should have
been were only pits from which rose tendrils of black smoke.
i have done it, he thought. i have killed baalzamon, killed shaitan! i have
won the last battle! light, i am the dragon reborn! the breaker of nations,
the breaker of the world. no! i will end the breaking, end the killing! i will
make it end!
he raised callandor above his head. silver lightning crackled from the
blade, jagged streaks arching toward the great dome above. stop! he
shouted. the fighting ceased; men stared at him in wonder, over black veils,
from beneath the rims of round helmets. i am rand althor! he called, so
his voice rang through the chamber. i am the dragon reborn! callandor
shone in his grasp.
one by one, veiled men and helmeted, they knelt to him, crying, the
dragon is reborn! the dragon is reborn!


 c h a p t e r
5 6


people of the dragon


throughout the city of tear people woke with the dawn, speaking of the
dreams they had had, dreams of the dragon battling baalzamon in the heart
of the stone, and when their eyes rose to the great fortress of the stone, they
beheld a banner waving from its greatest height. across a field of white
flowed a sinuous form like a great serpent scaled in scarlet and gold, but with
a golden lions mane and four legs, each tipped with five golden claws. men
came, stunned and frightened, from the stone to speak in hushed tones of
what had happened in the night, and men and women thronged the streets,
weeping as they shouted the fulfillment of prophecy.
the dragon! they shouted. althor! the dragon! althor!
peering through an arrowslit high on the side of the stone, mat shook his
head as he listened to the chorus rising out of the city in waves. well, maybe
he is. he was still having a hard enough time coming to grips with rand
really being there.
everyone in the stone seemed to agree with the people below, or if they did
not, they were not letting on. he had seen rand just once since the night
before, striding along a hall with callandor in his hand, surrounded by a
dozen veiled aiel and trailing a cloud of tairens, a knot of defenders of the
stone and most of the few surviving high lords. the high lords, at least,
seemed to think rand would need them to help him rule the world; the aiel
kept everyone back with sharp looks, though, and spears if need be. they
surely believed rand was the dragon, though they called him he who comes
with the dawn. there were nearly two hundred aiel in the stone. they had


 lost a third of their numbers in the fight, but they had killed or captured ten
times as many defenders.
as he turned from the arrowslit, his eyes brushed across rhuarc. there was
a tall stand at one end of the room, carved and polished upright wheels of
some pale, darkstriped wood with shelves slung between them so all of the
shelves would stay flat as the wheels were revolved. each shelf held a large
book, bound in gold, covers set with sparkling gems. the aiel had one of the
books open and was reading. some sort of essays, mat thought. who would
have thought an aiel would read books? whod have thought an aiel could
bloody read?
rhuarc glanced in his direction, all cold blue eyes and level stare. mat
looked away hastily, before the aiel could read his thoughts on his face. at
least he is not veiled, thank the light! burn me, that aviendha nearly took my
head off when i asked her if she could do any dances without spears. bain and
chiad presented another problem. they were certainly pretty and more than
friendly, but he could not manage to talk to one without the other. the male
aiel seemed to think his efforts to get one of them alone were funny, and for
that matter, so did bain and chiad. women are odd, but aiel women make odd
seem normal!
the great table in the middle of the room, ornately carved and gilded on
edges and thick legs, had been meant for gatherings of the high lords.
moiraine sat in one of the throne like chairs, with the crescent banner of tear
worked into its towering back in gilt and polished carnelian and pearlshell.
egwene, nynaeve, and elayne sat close by her.
i still cannot believe perrin is here in tear, nynaeve was saying. are
you sure he is all right?
mat shook his head. he would have expected perrin to have been up in the
stone last night; the blacksmith had always been braver than anyone with
good sense.
he was well when i left him. moiraines voice was serene. whether he
still is, i do not know. his . . . companion is in some considerable danger, and
he may have put himself into it, also.
his companion? egwene said sharply. whawho is perrins
companion?
what sort of danger? nynaeve demanded.
nothing that need concern you, the aes sedai said calmly. i will go and


 see to her as i may, shortly. i have delayed only to show you this, which i
found among the terangreal and other things of the power the high lords
collected over the years. she took something from her pouch and laid it on
the table before her. it was a disc the size of a mans hand, seemingly made of
two teardrops fitted together, one black as pitch, the other white as snow.
mat seemed to remember seeing others like it. ancient, like this one, but
broken, where this was whole. three of them, he had seen; not all together,
but all in pieces. but that could not be; he remembered that they were made of
cuendillar, unbreakable by any power, even the one power.
one of the seven seals lews therin kinslayer and the hundred
companions put on the dark ones prison when they resealed it, elayne
said, nodding as if confirming her own memory.
more precisely, moiraine told her, a focus point for one of the seals. but
in essence, you are correct. during the breaking of the world they were
scattered and hidden for safety; since the trolloc wars they have been lost in
truth. she sniffed. i begin to sound like verin.
egwene shook her head. i suppose i should have expected to find that
here. twice before rand faced baalzamon, and both times at least one of the
seals was present.
and this time unbroken, nynaeve said. for the first time, the seal is
unbroken. as if that mattered, now.
you think it does not? moiraines voice was dangerous in its quiet, and
the other women frowned at her.
mat rolled his eyes. they kept talking about unimportant things. he did not
much like standing not twenty feet from that disc now that he knew what it
was, no matter the value of cuendillar, but. . . . your pardon? he said.
they all turned to stare at him as if he were interrupting something
important. burn me! break them out of a prison cell, save their lives half a
dozen times between them before the night is done, and they glower as hard
as the bloody aes sedai! well, they did not thank me then, either, did they?
youd have thought i was sticking my nose in where it wasnt wanted then,
too, instead of keeping some bloody defender from putting a sword through
one of them. aloud, he said mildly, you do not mind if i ask a question, do
you? you have all been talking this aes sedai . . . uh . . . business, and no one
has bothered to tell me anything.
mat? nynaeve said warningly, tugging her braid, but moiraine said, in a


 calm only just touched with impatience, what is it that you wish to know?
i want to know how all of this can be. he meant to keep his tone soft, but
despite himself he picked up intensity as he went along. the stone of tear
has fallen! the prophecies said that would never happen till the people of the
dragon came. does that mean we are the bloody people of the dragon? you,
me, lan, and a few hundred bloody aiel? he had seen the warder during the
night; there had not seemed to be much edge between lan and the aiel as to
who was the more deadly. as rhuarc straightened to stare at him, he hastily
added, uh, sorry, rhuarc. slip of the tongue.
perhaps, moiraine said slowly. i came to stop belal from killing rand.
i did not expect to see the stone of tear fall. perhaps we are. prophecies are
fulfilled as they are meant to be, not as we think they should be.
belal. mat shivered. he had heard that name last night, and he did not like
it any more in daylight. if he had known one of the forsaken was looseand
inside the stonehe would never have gone near the place. he glanced at
egwene, and nynaeve, and elayne. well, id have come in like a bloody
mouse, anyway, not thumping people left and right! sandar had gone
scurrying out of the stone at daybreak; to take the news to mother guenna, he
claimed, but mat thought it was just to escape those stares from the three
women, who looked as if they had not yet quite decided what to do about him.
rhuarc cleared his throat. when a man wishes to become a clan chief, he
must go to rhuidean, in the lands of the jenn aiel, the clan that is not. he
spoke slowly and frowned often at the redfringed silk carpet under his soft
boots, a man trying to explain what he did not want to explain at all. women
who wish to become wise ones also make this journey, but their marking, if
they are marked, is kept secret among themselves. the men who are chosen
at rhuidean, those who survive, return marked on the left arm. so.
he pushed back the sleeves of his coat and shirt together to reveal his left
forearm, the skin much paler than that of his hands and face. etched into the
skin as if part of it, wrapped twice around, marched the same goldandscarlet
form as rippled on the banner above the stone.
the aiel let his sleeve fall with a sigh. it is a name not spoken except
among the clan chiefs and the wise ones. we are. . . . he cleared his throat
again, unable to say it here.
the aiel are the people of the dragon. moiraine spoke quietly, but she
sounded as close to startlement as mat could remember ever hearing her.
that i did not know.


 then it really is all done, mat said, just as the prophecies said. we can
all go on our way with no more worries. the amyrlin wont need me to blow
that bloody horn now!
how can you say that? egwene demanded. dont you understand the
forsaken are loose?
not to mention the black ajah, nynaeve added grimly. we took only
amico and joiya here. eleven escapedand i would like to know how!and
the light alone knows how many others there are we do not know.
yes, elayne said in a tone just as hard. i may not be up to facing one of
the forsaken, but i mean to take pieces out of liandrins hide!
of course, mat said smoothly. of course. are they crazy? they want to
chase after the black ajah and the forsaken? i only meant the hardest part is
done. the stone has fallen to the people of the dragon, rand has callandor,
and shaitan is dead. moiraines stare was so hard that he thought the stone
shook for a moment.
be quiet, you fool! the aes sedai said in a voice like a knife. do you
want to call his attention to you, naming the dark one?
but hes dead! mat protested. rand killed him. i saw the body! and a
fine stink that was, too. i never thought anything could rot that fast.
you saw the body,  moiraine said with a twist to her mouth. a mans
body. not the dark one, mat.
he looked at egwene and the other two women; they appeared as confused
as he. rhuarc looked to be thinking of a battle he had thought was won and
now learned had not even been fought. then who was it? mat demanded.
moiraine, my memory has holes big enough for a wagon and team, but i
remember baalzamon being in my dreams. i remember! burn me, i do not
see how i can ever forget! and i recognized what was left of that face.
you recognized baalzamon, moiraine said. or rather, the man who
called himself baalzamon. the dark one yet lives, imprisoned at shayol
ghul, and the shadow yet lies across the pattern.
the light illumine and protect us, elayne murmured in a faint voice. i
thought. . . . i thought the forsaken were the worst we had to worry about,
now.
are you sure, moiraine? nynaeve said. rand was certainis certain
that he killed the dark one. you seem to be saying baalzamon was not the


 dark one at all. i dont understand! how can you be so sure? and if he was
not the dark one, who was he?
i can be sure for the simplest of reasons, nynaeve. however fast decay
took it, that was a mans body. can you believe that if the dark one were
killed he would leave a human body? the man rand killed was a man.
perhaps he was the first of the forsaken freed, or perhaps he was never
entirely bound. we may never know which.
i . . . may know who he was. egwene paused with an uncertain frown.
at least, i may have a clue. verin showed me a page from an old book that
mentioned baalzamon and ishamael together. it was almost high chant and
very nearly incomprehensible, but i remember something about a name
hidden behind a name. maybe baalzamon was ishamael.
perhaps, moiraine said. perhaps it was ishamael. but if it was, at least
nine of the thirteen still live. lanfear, and sammael, and ravhin, and. . . .
paah! even knowing that some of those nine at least are free is not the most
important thing. she laid a hand atop the blackandwhite disc on the table.
three of the seals are broken. only four still hold. only those four seals
stand between the dark one and the world, and it may be that even with those
whole he can touch the world after a fashion. whatever battle we won here
battle or skirmishit is far from the last.
mat watched their faces firmegwenes and nynaeves and elaynes;
slowly, reluctantly, but determinedly, tooand shook his head. bloody
women! theyre all ready to go on with this, go on chasing the black ajah,
trying to fight the forsaken and the bloody dark one. well, they neednt think
i am going to come pull them out of the soup pot again. they just neednt
think it, thats all!
one of the tall, paired doors pushed open while he was trying to think of
something to say, and a tall young woman of regal bearing entered the room,
wearing a coronet with a golden hawk in flight above her brows. her black
hair swept to pale shoulders, and her dress of the finest red silk left those
shoulders bare, along with a considerable expanse of what mat noted as an
admirable bosom. for a moment she studied rhuarc interestedly with large,
dark eyes; then she turned them on the women at the table, coolly imperious.
mat she appeared to ignore completely.
i am not used to being given messages to carry, she announced,
flourishing a folded parchment in one slim hand.
and who are you, child? moiraine asked.


 the young woman drew herself up even more, which mat would have
thought was impossible. i am berelain, first of mayene. she tossed the
parchment down on the table in front of moiraine with a haughty gesture and
turned back to the door.
a moment, child, moiraine said, unfolding the parchment. who gave
this to you? and why did you bring it, if you are so unused to carrying
messages?
i . . . do not know. berelain stood facing the door; she sounded puzzled.
she was . . . impressive. she gave herself a shake and seemed to recover her
opinion of herself. for a moment she studied rhuarc with a small smile. you
are the leader of these aielmen? your fighting disturbed my sleep. perhaps i
will ask you to dine with me. one day quite soon. she looked over her
shoulder at moiraine. i am told the dragon reborn has taken the stone.
inform the lord dragon that the first of mayene will dine with him tonight.
and she marched out of the room; mat could think of no other way to
describe that stately, onewoman procession.
i would like to have her in the tower as novice. egwene and elayne said
it almost like echoes, then shared a tight smile.
listen to this, moiraine said.  lews therin was mine, he is mine, and
he will be mine, forever. i give him into your charge, to keep for me until i
come. it is signed lanfear.  the aes sedai turned that cool gaze on mat.
and you thought it was done? you are taveren, mat, a thread more crucial
to the pattern than most, and the sounder of the horn of valere. nothing is
done for you, yet.
they were all looking at him. nynaeve sadly, egwene as though she had
never seen him before, elayne as if she expected him to change into someone
else. rhuarc had a certain respect in his eyes, though mat would just as soon
have done without it, all things considered.
well, of course, he told them. burn me! i understand. i wonder how
soon thom will be fit to travel? time to run. maybe perrin will come with us.
you can count on me.
from outside, the cries still rose, unceasing. the dragon! althor! the
dragon! althor! the dragon! althor! the dragon!
and it was written that no hand but his should wield the sword held in the
stone, but he did draw it out, like fire in his hand, and his glory did burn the
world. thus did it begin. thus do we sing his rebirth. thus do we sing the
beginning.




