
chapter 1

the flame of tar valon
the wheel of time turns, and ages come and pass leaving memories that become legend, then fade to
myth, and are long forgot when that age comes again. in one age, called the third age by some, an age
yet to come, an age long past, a wind rose in the mountains of dhoom. the wind was not the beginning.
there are neither beginnings nor endings to the turning of the wheel of time. but it was a beginning.
born among black, knifeedged peaks, where death roamed the high passes yet hid from things still
more dangerous, the wind blew south across the tangled forest of the great blight, a forest tainted and
twisted by the touch of the dark one. the sickly sweet smell of corruption faded by the time the wind
crossed that invisible line men called the border of shienar, where spring flowers hung thick in the trees.
it should have been summer by now, but spring had been late in coming, and the land had run wild to
catch up. newcome pale green bristled on every bush, and red new growth tipped every tree branch.
the wind rippled farmers fields like verdant ponds, solid with crops that almost seemed to creep upward


visibly.
the smell of death was all but gone long before the wind reached the stonewalled town of fal dara on
its hills, and whipped around a tower of the fortress in the very center of the town, a tower atop which
two men seemed to dance. hardwalled and high, fal dara, both keep and town, never taken, never
betrayed. the wind moaned across woodshingled rooftops, around tall stone chimneys and taller
towers, moaned like a dirge.
stripped to the waist, rand althor shivered at the winds cold caress, and his fingers flexed on the long
hilt of the practice sword he held. the hot sun had slicked his chest, and his dark, reddish hair clung to
his head in a sweatcurled mat. a faint odor in the swirl of air made his nose twitch, but he did not
connect the smell with the image of an old grave freshopened that flashed through his head. he was
barely aware of odor or image at all; he strove to keep his mind empty, but the other man sharing the
tower top with him kept intruding on the emptiness. ten paces across, the tower top was, encircled by a
chesthigh, crenellated wall. big enough and more not to feel crowded, except when shared with a
warder.
young as he was, rand was taller than most men, but lan stood just as tall and more heavily muscled, if
not quite so broad in the shoulders. a narrow band of braided leather held the warders long hair back
from his face, a face that seemed made from stony planes and angles, a face unlined as if to belie the tinge
of gray at his temples. despite the heat and exertion, only a light coat of sweat glistened on his chest and
arms. rand searched lans icy blue eyes, hunting for some hint of what the other man intended. the
warder never seemed to blink, and the practice sword in his hands moved surely and smoothly as he
flowed from one stance to another.
with a bundle of thin, loosely bound staves in place of a blade, the practice sword would make a loud
clack when it struck anything, and leave a welt where it hit flesh. rand knew all too well. three thin red
lines stung on his ribs, and another burned his shoulder. it had taken all his efforts not to wear more
decorations. lan bore not a mark.
as he had been taught, rand formed a single flame in his mind and concentrated on it, tried to feed all
emotion and passion into it, to form a void within himself, with even thought outside. emptiness came. as
was too often the case of late it was not a perfect emptiness; the flame still remained, or some sense of
light sending ripples through the stillness. but it was enough, barely. the cool peace of the void crept
over him, and he was one with the practice sword, with the smooth stones under his boots, even with
lan. all was one, and he moved without thought in a rhythm that matched the warders step for step and
move for move.
the wind rose again, bringing the ringing of bells from the town.somebodys still celebrating that
spring has finally come . the extraneous thought fluttered through the void on waves of light, disturbing
the emptiness, and as if the warder could read rands mind, the practice sword whirled in lans hands.
for a long minute the swiftclackclackclack of bundled lathes meeting filled the tower top. rand made
no effort to reach the other man; it was all he could do to keep the warders strikes from reaching him.
turning lans blows at the last possible moment, he was forced back. lans expression never changed;
the practice sword seemed alive in his hands. abruptly the warders swinging slash changed in
midmotion to a thrust. caught by surprise, rand stepped back, already wincing with the blow he knew
he could not stop this time.
the wind howled across the tower . . . and trapped him. it was as if the air had suddenly jelled, holding
him in a cocoon. pushing him forward. time and motion slowed; horrified, he watched lans practice



sword drift toward his chest. there was nothing slow or soft about the impact. his ribs creaked as if he
had been struck with a hammer. he grunted, but the wind would not allow him to give way; it still carried
him forward, instead. the lathes of lans practice sword flexed and bent  ever so slowly, it seemed to
rand  then shattered, sharp points oozing toward his heart, jagged lathes piercing his skin. pain lanced
through his body; his whole skin felt slashed. he burned as though the sun had flared to crisp him like
bacon in a pan.
with a shout, he threw himself stumbling back, falling against the stone wall. hand trembling, he touched
the gashes on his chest and raised bloody fingers before his gray eyes in disbelief.
and what was that fool move, sheepherder? lan grated. you know better by now, or should unless
you have forgotten everything ive tried to teach you. how badly are you  ? he cut off as rand
looked up at him.
the wind. rands mouth was dry. it  it pushed me! it . . . it was solid as a wall!
the warder stared at him in silence, then offered a hand. rand took it and let himself be pulled to his
feet.
strange things can happen this close to the blight, lan said finally, but for all the flatness of the words
he sounded troubled. that in itself was strange. warders, those halflegendary warriors who served the
aes sedai, seldom showed emotion, and lan showed little even for a warder. he tossed the shattered
lathe sword aside and leaned against the wall where their real swords lay, out of the way of their practice.
not like that, rand protested. he joined the other man, squatting with his back against the stone. that
way the top of the wall was higher than his head, protection of a kind from the wind. if it was a wind. no
wind had ever felt . . . solid . . . like that. peace! maybe not evenin the blight.
for someone like you .. . . lan shrugged as if that explained everything. how long before you leave,
sheepherder? a month since you said you were going, and i thought youd be three weeks gone by
now.
rand stared up at him in surprise.hes acting like nothing happened! frowning, he set down the
practice sword and lifted his real sword to his knees, fingers running along the long, leatherwrapped hilt
inset with a bronze heron. another bronze heron stood on the scabbard, and yet another was scribed on
the sheathed blade. it was still a little strange to him that he had a sword. any sword, much less one with
a blademasters mark. he was a farmer from the two rivers, so far away, now. maybe far away
forever, now. he was a shepherd like his father i wasa shepherd. what am i now?  and his father
had given him a heronmarked sword.tam ismy father, no matter what anybody says . he wished his
own thoughts did not sound as if he was trying to convince himself.
again lan seemed to read his mind. in the borderlands, sheepherder, if a man has the raising of a child,
that child is his, and none can say different.
scowling, rand ignored the warders words. it was no ones business but his own. i want to learn how
to use this. i need to. it had caused him problems, carrying a heronmarked sword. not everybody
knew what it meant, or even noticed it, but even so a heronmark blade, especially in the hands of a
youth barely old enough to be called a man, still attracted the wrong sort of attention. ive been able to
bluff sometimes, when i could not run, and ive been lucky, besides. but what happens when i cant run,
and i cant bluff, and my luck runs out?


you could sell it, lan said carefully. that blade is rare even among heronmark swords. it would
fetch a pretty price.
no! it was an idea he had thought of more than once, but he rejected it now for the same reason he
always had, and more fiercely for coming from someone else.as long as i keep it, i have the right to
call tam father. he gave it to me, and it gives me the right . i thought any heronmark blade was
rare.
lan gave him a sidelong look. tam didnt tell you, then? he must know. perhaps he didnt believe.
many do not. he snatched up his own sword, almost the twin of rands except for the lack of herons,
and whipped off the scabbard. the blade, slightly curved and singleedged, glittered silvery in the
sunlight.
it was the sword of the kings of malkier. lan did not speak of it  he did not even like others to speak
of it  but allan mandragoran was lord of the seven towers, lord of the lakes, and uncrowned
king of malkier. the seven towers were broken now, and the thousand lakes the lair of unclean
things. malkier lay swallowed by the great blight, and of all the malkieri lords, only one still lived.
some said lan had become a warder, bonding himself to an aes sedai, so he could seek death in the
blight and join the rest of his blood. rand had indeed seen lan put himself in harms way seemingly
without regard for his own safety, but far beyond his own life and safety he held those of moiraine, the
aes sedai who held his bond. rand did not think lan would truly seek death while moiraine lived.
turning his blade in the light, lan spoke. in the war of the shadow, the one power itself was used as a
weapon, and weapons were made with the one power. some weapons used the one power, things that
could destroy an entire city at one blow, lay waste to the land for leagues. just as well those were all lost
in the breaking; just as well no one remembers the making of them. but there were simpler weapons,
too, for those who would face myrddraal, and worse things the dreadlords made, blade to blade.
with the one power, aes sedai drew iron and other metals from the earth, smelted them, formed and
wrought them. all with the power. swords, and other weapons, too. many that survived the breaking of
the world were destroyed by men who feared and hated aes sedai work, and others have vanished
with the years. few remain, and few men truly know what they are. there have been legends of them,
swollen tales of swords that seemed to have a power of their own. youve heard the gleemens tales. the
reality is enough. blades that will not shatter or break, and never lose their edge. ive seen men
sharpening them  playing at sharpening, as it were  but only because they could not believe a sword
did not need it after use. all they ever did was wear away their oilstones.
those weapons the aes sedai made, and there will never be others. when it was done, war and age
ended together, with the world shattered, with more dead unburied than there were alive and those alive
fleeing, trying to find some place, any place, of safety, with every second woman weeping because shed
never see husband or sons again; when it was done, the aes sedai who still lived swore they would
never again make a weapon for one man to kill another. every aes sedai swore it, and every woman of
them since has kept that oath. even the red ajah, and they care little what happens to any male.
one of those swords, a plain soldiers sword  with a faint grimace, almost sad, if the warder could
be said to show emotion, he slid the blade back into its sheath  became something more. on the other
hand, those made for lordgenerals, with blades so hard no bladesmith could mark them, yet marked
already with a heron, those blades became sought after.
rands hands jerked away from the sword propped on his knees. it toppled, and instinctively he



grabbed it before it hit the floorstones. you mean aes sedai made this? i thought you were talking
aboutyour sword.
not all heronmark blades are aes sedai work. few men handle a sword with the skill to be named
blademaster and be awarded a heronmark blade, but even so, not enough aes sedai blades remain for
more than a handful to have one. most come from master bladesmiths; the finest steel men can make, yet
still wrought by a mans hands. but that one, sheepherder . . . that one could tell a tale of three thousand
years and more.
i cant get away from them, rand said, can i? he balanced the sword in front of him on scabbard
point; it looked no different than it had before he knew. aes sedai work.but tam gave it to me. my
fathergave it to me . he refused to think of how a two rivers shepherd had come by a heronmark
blade. there were dangerous currents in such thoughts, deeps he did not want to explore.
do you really want to get away, sheepherder? ill ask again. why are you not gone, then? the sword?
in five years i could make you worthy of it, make you a blademaster. you have quick wrists, good
balance, and you dont make the same mistake twice. but i do not have five years to give over to
teaching you, and you do not have five years for learning. you have not even one year, and you know it.
as it is, you will not stab yourself in the foot. you hold yourself as if the sword belongs at your waist,
sheepherder, and most village bullies will sense it. but youve had that much almost since the day you put
it on. so why are you still here?
mat and perrin are still here, rand mumbled. i dont want to leave before they do. i wont ever  i
might not see them again for  for years, maybe. his head dropped back against the wall. blood and
ashes! at least they just think im crazy not to go home with them. half the time nynaeve looks at me
like im six years old and ive skinned my knee, and shes going to make it better; the other half she looks
like shes seeing a stranger. one she might offend if she looks too closely, at that. shes a wisdom, and
besides that, i dont think shes ever been afraid of anything, but she . . . he shook his head. and
egwene. burn me! she knows why i have to go, but every time i mention it she looks at me, and i knot
up inside and . . . he closed his eyes, pressing the sword hilt against his forehead as if he could press
what he was thinking out of existence. i wish . . . i wish . . .
you wish everything could be the way it was, sheepherder? or you wish the girl would go with you
instead of to tar valon? you think shell give up becoming an aes sedai for a life of wandering? with
you? if you put it to her in the right way, she might. love is an odd thing. lan sounded suddenly weary.
as odd a thing as there is.
no. it was what he had been wishing, that she would want to go with him. he opened his eyes and
squared his back and made his voice firm. no, i wouldnt let her come with me if she did ask. he could
not do that to her.but light, wouldnt it he sweet, just for a minute, if she said she wanted to? she
gets muley stubborn if she thinks im trying to tell her what to do, but i can still protect her from that. he
wished she were back home in emonds field, but all hope of that had gone the day moiraine came to
the two rivers. even if it means she does become an aes sedai! the corner of his eye caught lans
raised eyebrow, and he flushed.
and that is all the reason? you want to spend as much time as you can with your friends from home
before they go? thats why youre dragging your feet? you know whats sniffing at your heels.
rand surged angrily to his feet. all right, its moiraine! i wouldnt even be here if not for her, and she
wont as much as talk to me.



youd be dead if not for her, sheepherder, lan said flatly, but rand rushed on.
she tells me . . . tells me horrible things about myself  his knuckles whitened on the sword.that im
going to go mad and die!  and then suddenly she wont even say two words to me. she acts as if im
no different than the day she found me, and that smells wrong, too.
you want her to treat you like what you are?
no! i dont mean that. burn me, i dont know what i mean half the time. i dont want that, and im
scared of the other. now shes gone off somewhere, vanished . . .
i told you she needs to be alone sometimes. it isnt for you, or anyone else, to question her actions.
. . . without telling anybody where she was going, or when shed be back, or even if she would be back.
she has to be able to tell me something to help me, lan. something. she has to. if she ever comes back.
shes back, sheepherder. last night. but i think she has told you all she can. be satisfied. youve
learned what you can from her. with a shake of his head, lans voice became brisk. you certainly
arent learning anything standing there. time for a little balance work. go through parting the silk,
beginning from heron wading in the rushes. remember that that heron form is only for practicing
balance. anywhere but doing forms, it leaves you wide open; you can strike home from it, if you wait for
the other man to move first, but youll never avoid his blade.
shehas to be able to tell me something, lan. that wind. it wasnt natural, and i dont care how close to
the blight we are.
heron wading in the rushes, sheepherder. and mind your wrists.
from the south came a faint peal of trumpets, a rolling fanfare slowly growing louder, accompanied by
the steadythrumthrumthrumthrum of drums. for a moment rand and lan stared at each other,
then the drums drew them to the tower wall to stare southward.
the city stood on high hills, the land around the city walls cleared to ankle height for a full mile in all
directions, and the keep covered the highest hill of all. from the tower top, rand had a clear view across
the chimneys and roofs to the forest. the drummers appeared first from the trees, a dozen of them,
drums lifting as they stepped to their own beat, mallets whirling. next came trumpeters, long, shining
horns raised, still calling the flourish. at that distance rand could not make out the huge, square banner
whipping in the wind behind them. lan grunted, though; the warder had eyes like a snow eagle.
rand glanced at him, but the warder said nothing, his eyes intent on the column emerging from the
forest. mounted men in armor rode out of the trees, and women on horseback, too. then a palanquin
borne by horses, one before and one behind, its curtains down, and more men on horseback. ranks of
men afoot, pikes rising above them like a bristle of long thorns, and archers with their bows held slanted
across their chests, all stepping to the drums. the trumpets cried again. like a singing serpent the column
wound its way toward fal dara.
the wind flapped the banner, taller than a man, straight out to one side. as big as it was, it was close
enough now for rand to see clearly. a swirl of colors that meant nothing to him, but at the heart of it, a
shape like a pure white teardrop. his breath froze in his throat. the flame of tar valon.
ingtars with them. lan sounded as if his thoughts were elsewhere. back from his hunting at last. been



gone long enough. i wonder if he had any luck?
aes sedai, rand whispered when he finally could. all those women out there . . . moiraine was aes
sedai, yes, but he had traveled with her, and if he did not entirely trust her, at least he knew her. or
thought he did. but she was only one. so many aes sedai together, and coming like this, was something
else again. he cleared his throat; when he spoke, his voice grated. why so many, lan? why any at all?
and with drums and trumpets and a banner to announce them.
aes sedai were respected in shienar, at least by most people, and the rest respectfully feared them, but
rand had been in places where it was different, where there was only the fear, and often hate. where he
had grown up, some men, at least, spoke of tar valon witches as they would speak of the dark one.
he tried to count the women, but they kept no ranks or order, moving their horses around to converse
with one another or with whoever was in the palanquin. goose bumps covered him. he had traveled with
moiraine, and met another aes sedai, and he had begun to think of himself as worldly. nobody ever left
the two rivers, or almost nobody, but he had. he had seen things no one back in the two rivers had
ever laid eyes on, done things they had only dreamed of, if they had dreamed so far. he had seen a
queen and met the daughterheir of andor, faced a myrddraal and traveled the ways, and none of it
had prepared him for this moment.
why so many? he whispered again.
the amyrlin seats come in person. lan looked at him, his expression as hard and unreadable as a
rock. your lessons are done, sheepherder. he paused then, and rand almost thought there was
sympathy on his face. that could not be, of course. better for you if you were a week gone. with that
the warder snatched up his shirt and disappeared down the ladder into the tower.
rand worked his mouth, trying to get a little moisture. he stared at the column approaching fal dara as
if it really were a snake, a deadly viper. the drums and trumpets sang, loud in his ears. the amyrlin seat,
who ordered the aes sedai.shes come because of me . he could think of no other reason.
they knew things, had knowledge that could help him, he was sure. and he did not dare ask any of
them. he was afraid they had come to gentle him.and afraid they havent, too , he admitted reluctantly.
light, i dont know which scares me more .
i didnt mean to channel the power, he whispered. it was an accident! light, i dont want anything to
do with it. i swear ill never touch it again! i swear it!
with a start, he realized that the aes sedai party was entering the city gates. the wind swirled up
fiercely, chilling his sweat like droplets of ice, making the trumpets sound like sly laughter; he thought he
could smell an opened grave, strong in the air.my grave, if i keep standing here .
grabbing his shirt, he scrambled down the ladder and began to run.

chapter 2



the welcome
the halls of fal dara keep, their smooth stone walls sparsely decorated with elegantly simple tapestries
and painted screens, bustled with news of the amyrlin seats imminent arrival. servants in
blackandgold darted about their tasks, running to prepare rooms or carry orders to the kitchens,
moaning that they could not have everything ready for so great a personage when they had had no
warning. darkeyed warriors, their heads shaven except for a topknot bound with a leather cord, did not
run, but haste filled their steps and their faces shone with an excitement normally reserved for battle.
some of the men spoke as rand hurried past.
ah, there you are, rand althor. peace favor your sword. on your way to clean up? youll want to
look your best when you are presented to the amyrlin seat. shell want to see you and your two friends
as well as the women, you can count on it.
he trotted toward the broad stairs, wide enough for twenty men abreast, that led up to the mens
apartments.
the amyrlin herself, come with no more warning than a pack peddler. must be because of moiraine
sedai and you southerners, eh? what else?
the wide, ironbound doors of the mens apartments stood open, and half jammed with topknotted
men buzzing with the amyrlins arrival.
ho, southlander! the amyrlins here. come for you and your friends, i suppose. peace, what honor for
you! she seldom leaves tar valon, and shes never come to the borderlands in my memory.
he fended them all off with a few words. he had to wash. find a clean shirt. no time to talk. they
thought they understood, and let him go. not a one of them knew a thing except that he and his friends
traveled in company with an aes sedai, that two of his friends were women who were going to tar
valon to train as aes sedai, but their words stabbed at him as if they knew everything.shes come for
me .
he dashed through the mens apartments, darted into the room he shared with mat and perrin . . . and
froze, his jaw dropping in astonishment. the room was filled with women wearing the blackandgold, all
working purposefully. it was not a big room, and its windows, a pair of tall, narrow arrowslits looking
down on one of the inner courtyards, did nothing to make it seem larger. three beds on blackandwhite
tiled platforms, each with a chest at the foot, three plain chairs, a washstand by the door, and a tall, wide
wardrobe crowded the room. the eight women in there seemed like fish in a basket.
the women barely glanced at him, and went right on clearing his clothes  and mats and perrins 
out of the wardrobe and replacing them with new. anything found in the pockets was put atop the chests,
and the old clothes were bundled up carelessly, like rags.
what are you doing? he demanded when he caught his breath. those are my clothes! one of the



women sniffed and poked a finger through a tear in the sleeve of his only coat, then added it to the pile on
the floor.
another, a blackhaired woman with a big ring of keys at her waist, set her eyes on him. that was
elansu,shatayan of the keep. he thought of the sharpfaced woman as a housekeeper, though the house
she kept was a fortress and scores of servants did her bidding. moiraine sedai said all of your clothes
are worn out, and the lady amalisa had new made to give you. just keep out of our way, she added
firmly, and we will be done the quicker. there were few men theshatayan could not bully into doing as
she wished  some said even lord agelmar  and she plainly did not expect any trouble with one man
young enough to be her son.
he swallowed what he had been going to say; there was no time for arguing. the amyrlin seat could be
sending for him at any minute. honor to the lady amalisa for her gift, he managed, after the shienaran
way, and honor to you, elansu shatayan. please, convey my words to the lady amalisa, and tell her i
said, heart and soul to serve. that ought to satisfy the shienaran love of ceremony for both women. but
now if youll pardon me, i want to change.
that is well, elansu said comfortably. moiraine sedai said to remove all the old. every stitch.
smallclothes, too. several of the women eyed him sideways. none of them made a move toward the
door.
he bit his cheek to keep from laughing hysterically. many ways were different in shienar from what he
was used to, and there were some to which he would never become accustomed if he lived forever. he
had taken to bathing in the small hours of the morning, when the big, tiled pools were empty of people,
after he discovered that at any other time a woman might well climb into the water with him. it could be a
scullion or the lady amalisa, lord agelmars sister herself  the baths were one place in shienar where
there was no rank  expecting him to scrub her back in return for the same favor, asking him why his
face was so red, had he taken too much sun? they had soon learned to recognize his blushes for what
they were, and not a woman in the keep but seemed fascinated by them.
i might be dead or worse in another hour, and theyre waiting to see me blush!he cleared his
throat. if youll wait outside, i will pass the rest out to you. on my honor.
one of the women gave a soft chortle, and even elansus lips twitched, but theshatayan nodded and
directed the other women to gather up the bundles they had made. she was the last to leave, and she
paused in the doorway to add, the boots, too. moiraine sedai said everything.
he opened his mouth, then closed it again. his boots, at least, were certainly still good, made by alwyn
alvan, the cobbler back in emonds field, and well broken in and comfortable. but if giving up his boots
would make theshatayan leave him alone so he could go, he would give her the boots, and anything else
she wanted. he had no time. yes. yes, of course. on my honor. he pushed on the door, forcing her
out.
alone, he dropped onto his bed to tug off his boots  they were still good, a little worn, the leather
cracked here and there, but still wearable and well brokenin to fit his feet  then hastily stripped off,
piling everything atop the boots, and washed at the basin just as quickly. the water was cold; the water
was always cold in the mens apartments.
the wardrobe had three wide doors carved in the simple shienaran manner, suggesting more than
showing a series of waterfalls and rocky pools. pulling open the center door, he stared for a moment at
what had replaced the few garments he had brought with him. a dozen highcollared coats of the finest



wool and as well cut as any he had ever seen on a merchants back or a lords, most embroidered like
feastday clothes. a dozen! three shirts for every coat, both linen and silk, with wide sleeves and tight
cuffs. two cloaks. two, when he had made do with one at a time all his life. one cloak was plain, stout
wool and dark green, the other deep blue with a stiff standing collar embroidered in gold with herons . . .
and high on the left breast, where a lord would wear his sign . . .
his hand drifted to the cloak of its own accord. as if uncertain what they would feel, his fingers brushed
the stitching of a serpent curled almost into a circle, but a serpent with four legs and a lions golden mane,
scaled in crimson and gold, its feet each tipped with five golden claws. his hand jerked back as if
burned.light help me! was it amalisa had this made, or moiraine? how many saw it? how many
know what it is, what it means? even one is too many. burn me, shes trying to get me killed.
bloody moiraine wont even talk to me, but now shes given me bloody fine new clothes to die in!
a rap at the door sent him leaping half out of his skin.
are you done? came elansus voice. every stitch, now. perhaps i had better . . .  a creak as if she
were trying the knob.
with a start rand realized he was still naked. im done, he shouted. peace! dont come in! hurriedly
he gathered up what he had been wearing, boots and all. ill bring them! hiding behind the door, he
opened it just wide enough to shove the bundle into the arms of theshatayan . thats everything.
she tried to peer through the gap. are you sure? moiraine sedai said everything. perhaps i had better
just look  
its everything, he growled. on my honor! he shouldered the door shut in her face, and heard
laughter from the other side.
muttering under his breath, he dressed hurriedly. he would not put it past any of them to find some
excuse to come bulling in anyway. the gray breeches were snugger than he was used to, but still
comfortable, and the shirt, with its billowy sleeves, was white enough to satisfy any goodwife in emonds
field on laundry day. the kneehigh boots fit as if he had worn them a year. he hoped it was just a good
cobbler, and not more aes sedai work.
all of these clothes would make a pack as big as he was. yet, he had grown used to the comfort of
clean shirts again, of not wearing the same breeches day after day until sweat and dirt made them as stiff
as his boots, then wearing them still. he took his saddlebags from his chest and stuffed what he could into
them, then reluctantly spread the fancy cloak out on the bed and piled a few more shirts and breeches on
that. folded with the dangerous sigil inside and tied with a cord looped so it could be slung on a
shoulder, it looked not much different from the packs he had seen carried by other young men on the
road.
a peal of trumpets rolled through the arrowslits, trumpets calling the fanfare from outside the walls,
trumpets answering from the keep towers.
ill pick out the stitching when i get a chance, he muttered. he had seen women picking out
embroidery when they had made a mistake or changed their mind on the pattern, and it did not look very
hard.
the rest of the clothes  most of them, in fact  he stuffed back into the wardrobe. no need to leave
evidence of flight to be found by the first person to poke a head in after he went.



still frowning, he knelt beside his bed. the tiled platforms on which the beds rested were stoves, where
a small fire damped down to burn all night could keep the bed warm through the worst night in a
shienaran winter. the nights were still cooler than he was used to this time of year, but blankets were
enough for warmth now. pulling open the firebox door, he took out a bundle he could not leave behind.
he was glad elansu had not thought anyone would keep clothes in there.
setting the bundle atop the blankets, he untied one end and partially unfolded it. a gleemans cloak,
turned inside out to hide the hundreds of patches that covered it, patches in every size and color
imaginable. the cloak itself was sound enough; the patches were a gleemans badge. had been a
gleemans badge.
inside nestled two hard leather cases. the larger held a harp, which he never touched.the harp was
never meant for a farmers clumsy fingers, boy . the other, long and slim, contained the
goldandsilver chased flute he had used to earn his supper and bed more than once since leaving home.
thom merrilin had taught him to play that flute, before the gleeman died. rand could never touch it
without remembering thom, with his sharp blue eyes and his long white mustaches, shoving the bundled
cloak into his hands and shouting for him to run. and then thom had run himself, knives appearing
magically in his hands as if he were performing, to face the myrddraal that was coming to kill them.
with a shiver, he redid the bundle. thats all over with. thinking of the wind on the tower top, he
added, strange things happen this close to the blight. he was not sure he believed it, not the way lan
had apparently meant it. in any case, even without the amyrlin seat, it was past time for him to be gone
from fal dara.
shrugging into the coat he had kept out  it was a deep, dark green, and made him think of the forests
at home, tams westwood farm where he had grown up, and the waterwood where he had learned to
swim  he buckled the heronmark sword to his waist and hung his quiver, bristling with arrows, on the
other side. his unstrung bow stood propped in the corner with mats and perrins, the stave two hands
taller than he was. he had made it himself since coming to fal dara, and besides him, only lan and
perrin could draw it. stuffing his blanketroll and his new cloak through the loops on his bundles, he slung
the pair from his left shoulder, tossed his saddlebags atop the cords, and grabbed the bow.leave the
swordarm free , he thought.make them think im dangerous. maybe somebodywill .
cracking the door revealed the hall all but empty; one liveried servant dashed by, but he never so much
as glanced at rand. as soon as the mans rapid footfalls faded, rand slipped out into the corridor.
he tried to walk naturally, casually, but with saddlebags on his shoulder and bundles on his back, he
knew he looked like what he was, a man setting out on a journey and not meaning to come back. the
trumpets called again, sounding fainter here inside the keep.
he had a horse, a tall bay stallion, in the north stable, called the lords stable, close by the salley gate
that lord agelmar used when he went riding. neither the lord of fal dara nor any of his family would
be riding today, though, and the stable might be empty except for the stableboys. there were two ways
to reach the lords stable from rands room. one would take him all the way around the keep, behind
lord agelmars private garden, then down the far side and through the farriers smithy, likewise certainly
empty now, to the stableyard. time enough that way for orders to be given, for a search to start, before
he reached his horse. the other was far shorter; first across the outer courtyard, where even now the
amyrlin seat was arriving with another dozen or more aes sedai.
his skin prickled at the thought; he had had more than enough of aes sedai for any sane lifetime. one



was too many. all the stories said it, and he knew it for fact. but he was not surprised when his feet took
him toward the outer courtyard. he would never see legendary tar valon  he could not afford that
risk, now or ever  but he might catch a glimpse of the amyrlin seat before he left. that would be as
much as seeing a queen.there cant he anything dangerous in just looking, from a distance. ill keep
moving and he gone before she ever knows i was there .
he opened a heavy, ironstrapped door onto the outer courtyard and stepped out into silence. people
forested the guardwalk atop every wall, topknotted soldiers, and liveried servants, and menials still in
their muck, all pressed together cheek by jowl, with children sitting on shoulders to look over their elders
heads or squeezing in to peer around waists and knees. every archers balcony was packed like a barrel
of apples, and faces even showed in the narrow arrowslits in the walls. a thick mass of people bordered
the courtyard like another wall. and all of them watched and waited in silence.
he pushed his way along the wall, in front of the smithies and fletchers stalls that lined the court  fal
dara was a fortress, not a palace, despite its size and grim grandeur, and everything about it served that
end  apologizing quietly to the people he jostled. some looked around with a frown, and a few gave a
second stare to his saddlebags and bundles, but none broke the silence. most did not even bother to
look at who had bumped past them.
he could easily see over the heads of most of them, enough to make out clearly what was going on in
the courtyard. just inside the main gate, a line of men stood beside their horses, sixteen of them. no two
wore the same kind of armor or carried the same sort of sword, and none looked like lan, but rand did
not doubt they were warders. round faces, square faces, long faces, narrow faces, they all had the look,
as if they saw things other men did not see, heard things other men did not hear. standing at their ease,
they looked as deadly as a pack of wolves. only one other thing about them was alike. one and all they
wore the colorshifting cloak he had first seen on lan, the cloak that often seemed to fade into whatever
was behind it. it did not make for easy watching or a still stomach, so many men in those cloaks.
a dozen paces in front of the warders, a row of women stood by their horses heads, the cowls of their
cloaks thrown back. he could count them, now. fourteen. fourteen aes sedai. they must be. tall and
short, slender and plump, dark and fair, hair cut short or long, hanging loose down their backs or
braided, their clothes were as different as the warders were, in as many cuts and colors as there were
women. yet they, too, had a sameness, one that was only obvious when they stood together like this. to
a woman, they seemed ageless. from this distance he would have called them all young, but closer he
knew they would be like moiraine. youngseeming yet not, smoothskinned but with faces too mature
for youth, eyes too knowing.
closer? fool! im too close already! burn me, i should have gone the long way. he pressed on
toward his goal, another ironbound door at the far end of the court, but he could not stop looking.
calmly the aes sedai ignored the onlookers and kept their attention on the curtained palanquin, now in
the center of the courtyard. the horses bearing it held as still as if ostlers stood at their harness, but there
was only one tall woman beside the palanquin, her face an aes sedais face, and she paid no mind to the
horses. the staff she held upright before her with both hands was as tall as she, the gilded flame capping
it standing above her eyes.
lord agelmar faced the palanquin from the far end of the court, bluff and square and face unreadable.
his highcollared coat of dark blue bore the three running red foxes of the house jagad as well as the
stooping black hawk of shienar. beside him stood ronan, agewithered but still tall; three foxes carved
from red avatine topped the tall staff theshambayan bore. ronan was elansus equal in ordering the
keep,shambayan andshatayan , but elansu left little for him except ceremonies and acting as lord



agelmars secretary. both mens topknots were snowwhite.
all of them  the warders, the aes sedai, the lord of fal dara, and hisshambayan  stood as still
as stone. the watching crowd seemed to hold its breath. despite himself, rand slowed.
suddenly ronan rapped his staff loudly three times on the broad paving stones, calling into the silence,
who comes here? who comes here? who comes here?
the woman beside the palanquin tapped her staff three times in reply. the watcher of the seals. the
flame of tar valon. the amyrlin seat.
why should we watch? ronan demanded.
for the hope of humankind, the tall woman replied.
against what do we guard?
the shadow at noon.
how long shall we guard?
from rising sun to rising sun, so long as the wheel of time turns.
agelmar bowed, his white topknot stirring in the breeze. fal dara offers bread and salt and welcome.
welcome is the amyrlin seat to fal dara, for here is the watch kept, here is the pact maintained.
welcome.
the tall woman drew back the curtain of the palanquin, and the amyrlin seat stepped out. darkhaired,
ageless as all aes sedai were ageless, she ran her eyes over the assembled watchers as she straightened.
rand flinched when her gaze crossed him; he felt as if he had been touched. but her eyes passed on and
came to rest on lord agelmar. a liveried servant knelt at her side with folded towels, steam still rising,
on a silver tray. formally, she wiped her hands and patted her face with a damp cloth. i offer thanks for
your welcome, my son. may the light illumine house jagad. may the light illumine fal dara and all her
people.
agelmar bowed again. you honor us, mother. it did not sound odd, her calling him son or him calling
her mother, though comparing her smooth cheeks to his craggy face made him seem more like her father,
or even grandfather. she had a presence that more than matched his. house jagad is yours. fal dara is
yours.
cheers rose on every side, crashing against the walls of the keep like breaking waves.
shivering, rand hurried toward the door to safety, careless of whom he bumped into now.just your
bloody imagination. she doesnt even know who you are. not yet. blood and ashes, if she did . . .
he did not want to think of what would have happened if she knew who he was, what he was. what
would happen when she finally found out. he wondered if she had had anything to do with the wind atop
the tower; aes sedai could do things like that. when he pushed through that door and slammed it shut
behind him, muting the roar of welcome that still shook the courtyard, he heaved a relieved sigh.
the halls here were as empty as the others had been, and he all but ran. out across a smaller courtyard,
with a fountain splashing in the center, down yet another corridor and out into the flagstoned stableyard.



the lords stable itself, built into the wall of the keep, stood tall and long, with big windows here inside
the walls, and horses kept on two floors. the smithy across the courtyard stood silent, the farrier and his
helpers gone to see the welcome.
tema, the leatheryfaced head groom, met him at the wide doors with a deep bow, touching his
forehead and then his heart. spirit and heart to serve, my lord. how may tema serve, my lord? no
warriors topknot here; temas hair sat on his head like an inverted gray bowl.
rand sighed. for the hundredth time, tema, i am not a lord.
as my lord wishes. the grooms bow was even lower this time.
it was his name that caused the problem, and a similarity. rand althor. allan mandragoran. for lan,
according to the custom of malkier, the royal al named him king, though he never used it himself. for
rand, al was just a part of his name, though he had heard that once, long ago, before the two rivers
was called the two rivers, it had meant son of. some of the servants in fal dara keep, though, had
taken it to mean he was a king, too, or at least a prince. all of his argument to the contrary had only
managed to demote him to lord. at least, he thought it had; he had never seen quite so much bowing and
scraping, even with lord agelmar.
i need red saddled, tema.  he knew better than to offer to do it himself; tema would not let rand
soil his hands. i thought id spend a few days seeing the country around the town. once he was on the
big bay stallions back, a few days would see him at the river erinin, or across the border into arafel.
theyll never find me then .
the groom bent himself almost double, and stayed bent. forgive, my lord, he whispered hoarsely.
forgive, but tema cannot obey.
flushing with embarrassment, rand took an anxious look around  there was no one else in sight 
then grabbed the mans shoulder and pulled him upright. he might not be able to stop tema and a few
others from acting like this, but he could try to stop anyone else from seeing it. why not, tema? tema,
look at me, please. why not?
it is commanded, my lord, tema said, still whispering. he kept dropping his eyes, not afraid, but
ashamed that he could not do what rand asked. shienarans took shame the way other people took
being branded a thief. no horse may leave this stable until the order is changed. nor any stable in the
keep, my lord.
rand had his mouth open to tell the man it was all right, but instead he licked his lips. no horse from
any stable?
yes, my lord. the order came down only a short time ago. only moments. temas voice picked up
strength. all the gates are closed as well, my lord. none may enter or leave without permission. not
even the city patrol, so tema has been told.
rand swallowed hard, but it did not lessen the feeling of fingers clutching his windpipe. the order,
tema. it came from lord agelmar?
of course, my lord. who else? lord agelmar did not speak the command to tema, of course, nor
even to the man who did speak to tema, but, my lord, who else could give such a command in fal
dara?



who else?rand jumped as the biggest bell in the keep bell tower let out a sonorous peal. the other bells
joined in, then bells from the town.
if tema may be bold, the groom called above the reverberations, my lord must be very happy.
rand had to shout back to be heard. happy? why?
the welcome is finished, my lord. temas gesture took in the bell tower. the amyrlin seat will be
sending for my lord, and my lords friends, to come to her, now.
rand broke into a run. he just had time to see the surprise on temas face, and then he was gone. he
did not care what tema thought.she will he sending for me now .

chapter 3

friends and enemies
rand did not run far, only as far as the sally gate around the corner from the stable. he slowed to a walk
before he got there, trying to appear casual and unhurried.
the arched gate was closed tight. it was barely big enough for two men to ride through abreast, but like
all the gates in the outer wall, it was covered with broad strips of black iron, and locked shut with a thick
bar. two guards stood before the gate in plain conical helmets and plateandmail armor, with long
swords on their backs. their golden surcoats bore the black hawk on the chest. he knew one of them
slightly, ragan. the scar from a trolloc arrow made a white triangle against ragans dark cheek behind
the bars of his faceguard. the puckered skin dimpled with a grin when he saw rand.
peace favor you, rand althor. ragan almost shouted to be heard over the bells. do you intend to go
hit rabbits over the head, or do you still insist that club is a bow? the other guard shifted to stand more
in front of the gate.
peace favor you, ragan, rand said, stopping in front of them. it was an effort to keep his voice calm.
you know its a bow. youve seen me shoot it.
no good from a horse, the other guard said sourly. rand recognized him, now, with his deepset,
almostblack eyes that never seemed to blink. they peered from his helmet like twin caves inside another
cave. he supposed there could be worse luck for him than masema guarding the gate, but he was not
sure how, short of a red aes sedai. its too long, masema added. i can shoot three arrows with a
horsebow while you loose one with that monster.



rand forced a grin, as if he thought it was a joke. masema had never made a joke in his hearing, nor
laughed at one. most of the men at fal dara accepted rand; he trained with lan, and lord agelmar had
him at table, and most important of all, he had arrived at fal dara in company with moiraine, an aes
sedai. some seemed unable to forget his being an outlander, though, barely saying two words to him,
and then only if they had to. masema was the worst of those.
its good enough for me, rand said. speaking of rabbits, ragan, how about letting me out? all this
noise and bustle is too much for me. better to be out hunting rabbits, even if i never see one.
ragan half turned to look at his companion, and rands hopes began to lift. ragan was an easygoing
man, his manner belying his grim scar, and he seemed to like rand. but masema was already shaking his
head. ragan sighed. it cannot be, rand althor. he gave a tiny nod toward masema as if to explain. if
it were up to him alone . . . no one is to leave without a written pass. too bad you did not ask a few
minutes ago. the command just came down to bar the gates.
but why would lord agelmar want to keepme in? masema was eyeing the bundles on rands back,
and his saddlebags. rand tried to ignore him. im his guest, he went on to ragan. by my honor, i could
have left anytime these past weeks. why would he mean this order for me? it is lord agelmars order,
isnt it? masema blinked at that, and his perpetual frown deepened; he almost appeared to forget rands
packs.
ragan laughed. who else could give such an order, rand althor? of course, it was uno who passed it
to me, but whose order could it have been?
masemas eyes, fixed on rands face, did not blink. i just want to go out by myself, thats all, rand
said. ill try one of the gardens, then. no rabbits, but at least there wont be a crowd. the light illumine
you, and peace favor you.
he walked away without waiting for an answering blessing, resolving not to go near any of the gardens
on any account.burn me, once the ceremonies are done there could be aes sedai in any of them .
aware of masemas eyes on his back  he was sure it was masema  he kept his pace normal.
suddenly the bells stopped ringing, and he skipped a step. minutes were passing. a great many of them.
time for the amyrlin seat to be shown to her chambers. time for her to send for him, to start a search
when he was not found. as soon as he was out of sight of the salley gate, he began to run again.
near the barracks kitchens, the carters gate, where all the foodstuffs for the keep were brought in,
stood closed and barred, behind a pair of soldiers. he hurried past, across the kitchen yard, as if he had
never meant to stop.
the dog gate, at the back of the keep, just high enough and wide enough for one man on foot, had its
guards, too. he turned around before they saw him. there were not many gates, even as big as the keep
was, but if the dog gate was guarded, they all would be.
perhaps he could find a length of rope . . . he climbed one of the stairs to the top of the outer wall, to
the wide parapet with its crenellated walls. it was not comfortable for him, being so high and exposed if
that wind came again, but from there he could see across the tall chimneys and sharp roofs of the town all
the way to the city wall. even after nearly a month, the houses still looked odd to his two rivers eyes,
eaves reaching almost to the ground as if the houses were all woodshingled roof, and chimneys angled to
let heavy snow slide past. a broad, paved square surrounded the keep, but only a hundred paces from
the wall lay streets full of people going about their daily business, aproned shopkeepers out under the



awnings in front of their shops, roughclothed farmers in town to buy and sell, hawkers and tradesmen
and townspeople gathered in knots, no doubt to talk about the surprise visit from the amyrlin seat. he
could see carts and people flowing through one of the gates in the town wall. apparently the guards there
had no orders about stopping anyone.
he looked up at the nearest guardtower; one of the soldiers raised a gauntleted hand to him. with a
bitter laugh, he waved back. not a foot of the wall but was under the eyes of guards. leaning through an
embrasure, he peered down past the slots in the stone for setting hoardings, down the sheer expanse of
stone to the drymoat far below. twenty paces wide and ten deep, faced with stone polished slippery
smooth. a low wall, slanted to give no hiding place, surrounded it to keep anyone from falling in by
accident, and its bottom was a forest of razorsharp spikes. even with a rope to climb down and no
guards watching, he could not cross that. what served to keep trollocs out in the last extreme served
just as well to keep him in.
suddenly he felt weary to the bone, drained. the amyrlin seat was there, and there was no way out.
no way out, and the amyrlin seat there. if she knew he was there, if she had sent the wind that had
seized him, then she was already hunting him, hunting with an aes sedais powers. rabbits had more
chance against his bow. he refused to give up, though. there were those who said two rivers folk
could teach stones and give lessons to mules. when there was nothing else left, two rivers people hung
on to their stubbornness.
leaving the wall, he wandered through the keep. he paid no mind to where he went, so long as it was
nowhere he would be expected. not anywhere near his room, nor any of the stables, nor any gate 
masema might risk unos tongue to report him trying to leave  nor garden. all he could think of was
keeping away fromany aes sedai. even moiraine. sheknew about him. despite that, she had done
nothing against him.so far. so far as you know. what if shes changed her mind? maybe she sent for
the amyrlin seat .
for a moment, feeling lost, he leaned against the corridor wall, the stone hard under his shoulder. eyes
blank, he stared at a distant nothing and saw things he did not want to see.gentled. would it be so bad,
to have it all over? reallyover? he closed his eyes, but he could still see himself, huddling like a rabbit
with nowhere left to run, and aes sedai closing round him like ravens.they almost always die soon
after, men whove been gentled. they stop wanting to live . he remembered thom merrilins words
too well to face that. with a brisk shake, he hurried on down the hall. no need to stay in one place until
he was found.how long till they find you anyway? youre like a sheep in a pen. how long? he
touched the sword hilt at his side.no, not a sheep. not for aes sedai or anybody else . he felt a little
foolish, but determined.
people were returning to their tasks. a din of voices and clattering pots filled the kitchen that lay nearest
the great hall, where the amyrlin seat and her party would feast that night. cooks and scullions and
potboys all but ran at their work; the spit dogs trotted in their wicker wheels to turn the spitted meats. he
made his way quickly through the heat and steam, through the smells of spices and cooking. no one
spared him a second glance; they were all too busy.
the back halls, where the servants lived in small apartments; were stirring like a kicked antheap as men
and women scurried to don their best livery. children did their playing in corners, out of the way. boys
waved wooden swords, and girls played with carved dolls, some announcing thathers was the amyrlin
seat. most of the doors stood open, doorways blocked only by beaded curtains. normally, that meant
whoever lived there was open to visitors, but today it simply meant the residents were in a hurry. even
those who bowed to him did so with hardly a pause.



would any of them hear, when they went to serve, that he was being sought, and speak of seeing him?
speak to an aes sedai and tell her where to find him? the eyes that he passed suddenly appeared to be
studying him slyly, and to be weighing and considering behind his back. even the children took on
sharper looks in his minds eye. he knew it was just his imagination  he was sure it was; it had to be 
but when the servants apartments were behind him, he felt as if he had escaped before a trap could
spring shut.
some places in the keep were empty of people, the folk who normally worked there released for the
sudden holiday. the armorers forge, with all the fires banked, the anvils silent. silent. cold. lifeless. yet
somehow not empty. his skin prickled, and he spun on his heel. no one there. just the big square tool
chests and the quenching barrels full of oil. the hair on the back of his neck stirred, and he whipped
round again. the hammers and tongs hung in their places on the wall. angrily he stared around the big
room.theres nobody there. its just my imagination. that wind, and the amyrlin; thats enough to
make me imagine things .
outside in the armorers yard, the wind swirled up around him momentarily. despite himself he jumped,
thinking it meant to catch him. for a moment he smelled the faint odor of decay again, and heard
someone behind him laughing slyly. just for a moment. frightened, he edged in a circle, peering warily.
the yard, paved with rough stone, was empty except for him.just your bloody imagination! he ran
anyway, and behind him he thought he heard the laughter again, this time without the wind.
in the woodyard, the presence returned, the sense of someone there. the feel of eyes peering at him
around tall piles of split firewood under the long sheds, darting glances over the stacks of seasoned
planks and timbers waiting on the other side of the yard for the carpenters shop, now closed up tight. he
refused to look around, refused to think of how one set of eyes could move from place to place so fast,
could cross the open yard from the firewood shed to the lumbershed without even a flicker of movement
that he could see. he was sure it was one set of eyes.imagination. or maybe im going crazy already
. he shivered.not yet. light, please not yet . stiffbacked, he stalked across the woodyard, and the
unseen watcher followed.
down deep corridors lit only by a few rush torches, in storerooms filled with sacks of dried peas or
beans, crowded with slatted racks heaped with wrinkled turnips and beets, or stacked with barrels of
wine and casks of salted beef and kegs of ale, the eyes were always there, sometimes following him,
sometimes waiting when he entered. he never heard a footstep but his own, never heard a door creak
except when he opened and closed it, but the eyes were there.light, i amgoing crazy .
then he opened another storeroom door, and human voices, human laughter, drifted out to fill him with
relief. there would be no unseen eye here. he went in.
half the room was stacked to the ceiling with sacks of grain. in the other half a thick semicircle of men
knelt in front of one of the bare walls. they all seemed to wear the leather jerkins and bowlcut hair of
menials. no warriors topknots, no livery. no one who might betray him accidentally.what about on
purpose? the rattle of dice came through their soft murmurs, and somebody let out a raucous laugh at
the throw.
loial was watching them dice, rubbing his chin thoughtfully with a finger thicker than a big mans thumb,
his head almost reaching the rafters nearly two spans up. none of the dicers gave him a glance. ogier
were not exactly common in the borderlands, or anywhere else, but they were known and accepted
here, and loial had been in fal dara long enough to excite little comment. the ogiers dark, stiffcollared
tunic was buttoned up to his neck and flared below the waist over his high boots, and one of the big
pockets bulged and sagged with the weight of something. books, if rand knew him. even watching men



gamble, loial would not be far from a book.
in spite of everything, rand found himself grinning. loial often had that effect on him. the ogier knew so
much about some things, so little about others, and he seemed to want to know everything. yet rand
could remember the first time he ever saw loial, with his tufted ears and his eyebrows that dangled like
long mustaches and his nose almost as wide as his face  saw him and thought he was facing a trolloc.
it still shamed him. ogier and trollocs. myrddraal, and things from the dark corners of midnight tales.
things out of stories and legends: that was how he had thought of them before he left emonds field. but
since leaving home he had seen too many stories walking in the flesh ever to be so sure again. aes sedai,
and unseen watchers, and a wind that caught and held. his smile faded.
all the stories are real, he said softly.
loials ears twitched, and his head turned toward rand. when he saw who it was, the ogiers face split
in a grin, and he came over. ah, there you are. his voice was a deep bumblebee rumble. i did not see
you at the welcome. that was something i had not seen before. two things. the shienaran welcome,
and the amyrlin seat. she looks tired, dont you think? it cannot be easy, being amyrlin. worse than
being an elder, i suppose. he paused, with a thoughtful look, but only for a breath. tell me, rand, do
you play at dice, too? they play a simpler game here, with only three dice. we use four in thestedding .
they wont let me play, you know. they just say, glory to the builders, and will not bet against me. i
dont think thats fair, do you? the dice they useare rather small  he frowned at one of his hands, big
enough to cover a human head  but i still think  
rand grabbed his arm and cut him off.the builders! loial, ogier built fal dara, didnt they? do you
know any way out except by the gates? a crawl hole. a drain pipe. anything at all, if its big enough for a
man to wiggle through. out of the wind would be good, too.
loial gave a pained grimace, the ends of his eyebrows almost brushing his cheeks. rand, ogier built
mafal dadaranel, but that city was destroyed in the trolloc wars. this  he touched the stone wall
lightly with broad fingertips  was built by men. i can sketch a plan of mafal dadaranel  i saw the
maps, once, in an old book in stedding shangtai  but of fal dara, i know no more than you. it is well
built, though, isnt it? stark, but well made.
rand slumped against the wall, squeezing his eyes shut. i need a way out, he whispered. the gates are
barred, and they wont let anyone pass, but i need a way out.
but why, rand? loial said slowly. no one here will hurt you. are you all right? rand? suddenly his
voice rose. mat! perrin! i think rand is sick.
rand opened his eyes to see his friends straightening up out of the knot of dicers. mat cauthon,
longlimbed as a stork, wearing a half smile as if he saw something funny that no one else saw.
shaggyhaired perrin aybara, with heavy shoulders and thick arms from his work as a blacksmiths
apprentice. they both still wore their two rivers garb, plain and sturdy, but travelworn.
mat tossed the dice back into the semicircle as he stepped out, and one of the men called, here,
southlander, you cant quit while youre winning.
better than when im losing, mat said with a laugh. unconsciously he touched his coat at the waist, and
rand winced. mat had a dagger with a ruby in its hilt under there, a dagger he was never without, a
dagger he could not be without. it was a tainted blade, from the dead city of shadar logoth, tainted and
twisted by an evil almost as bad as the dark one, the evil that had killed shadar logoth two thousand



years before, yet still lived among the abandoned ruins. that taint would kill mat if he kept the dagger; it
would kill him even faster if he put it aside. youll have another chance to win it back. wry snorts from
the kneeling men indicated they did not think there was much chance of that.
perrin kept his eyes down as he followed mat across to rand. perrin always kept his eyes down these
days, and his shoulders sagged as if he carried a weight too heavy even for their width.
whats the matter, rand? mat asked. youre as white as your shirt. hey! where did you get those
clothes? you turning shienaran? maybe ill buy myself a coat like that, and a fine shirt. he shook his
coat pocket, producing a clink of coins. i seem to have luck with the dice. i can hardly touch them
without winning.
you dont have to buy anything, rand said tiredly. moiraine had all our clothes replaced. theyre
burned already for all i know, all but what you two are wearing. elansu will probably be around to
collect those, too, so id change fast if i were you, before she takes them off your back. perrin still did
not look up, but his cheeks turned red; mats grin deepened, though it looked forced. they too had had
encounters in the baths, and only mat tried to pretend it did not matter. and im not sick. i just need to
get out of here. the amyrlin seat is here. lan said . . . he said with her here, it would have been better
for me if i were gone a week. i need to leave, and all the gates are barred.
he said that? mat frowned. i dont understand. hed never sayanything against an aes sedai. why
now? look, rand, i dont like aes sedai any more than you do, but they arent going to do anything to
us. he lowered his voice to say that, and looked over his shoulder to see if any of the gamblers was
listening. feared the aes sedai might be, but in the borderlands, they were far from being hated, and a
disrespectful comment about them could land you in a fight, or worse. look at moiraine. she isnt so
bad, even if she is aes sedai. youre thinking like old cenn buie telling his tall tales back home, in the
winespring inn. i mean, she hasnt hurt us, and they wont. why would they?
perrins eyes lifted. yellow eyes, gleaming in the dim light like burnished gold.moiraine hasnt hurt us?
rand thought. perrins eyes had been as deep a brown as mats when they left the two rivers. rand
had no idea how the change had come about  perrin did not want to talk about it, or about very much
of anything since it happened  but it had come at the same time as the slump in his shoulders, and a
distance in his manner as if he felt alone even with friends around him. perrins eyes and mats dagger.
neither would have happened if they had not left emonds field, and it was moiraine who had taken
them away. he knew that was not fair. they would probably all be dead at trollocs hands, and a good
part of emonds field as well, if she had not come to their village. but that did not make perrin laugh the
way he used to, or take the dagger from mats belt.and me? if i was home and still alive, would i still
be what i am now? at least i wouldnt be worrying about what the aes sedai are going to do to
me .
mat was still looking at him quizzically, and perrin had raised his head enough to stare from under his
eyebrows. loial waited patiently. rand could not tell them why he had to stay away from the amyrlin
seat. they did not know what he was. lan knew, and moiraine. and egwene, and nynaeve. he wished
none of them knew, and most of all he wished egwene did not, but at least mat and perrin  and loial,
too  believed he was still the same. he thought he would rather die than let them know, than see the
hesitation and worry he sometimes caught in egwenes eyes, and nynaeves, even when they were trying
their best.
somebodys . . . watching me, he said finally. following me. only. . . only, theres nobody there.
perrins head jerked up, and mat licked his lips and whispered, a fade?



of course not, loial snorted. how could one of the eyeless enter fal dara, town or keep? by law,
no one may hide his face inside the town walls, and the lamplighters are charged with keeping the streets
lit at night so there isnt a shadow for a myrddraal to hide in. it could not happen.
walls dont stop a fade, mat muttered. not when it wants to come in. i dont know as laws and
lamps will do any better. he did not sound like someone who had half thought fades were only
gleemens tales less than half a year before. he had seen too much, too.
and there was the wind, rand added. his voice hardly shook as he told what had happened on the
tower top. perrins fists tightened until his knuckles cracked. i just want to leave here, rand finished. i
want to go south. somewhere away. just somewhere away.
but if the gates are barred, mat said, how do we get out?
rand stared at him. we? he had to go alone. it would be dangerous for anyone near him, eventually.
he would be dangerous, and even moiraine could not tell him how long he had. mat, you know you
have to go to tar valon with moiraine. she said thats the only place you can be separated from that
bloody dagger without dying. and you know what will happen if you keep it.
mat touched his coat over the dagger, not seeming to realize what he was doing. an aes sedais gift is
bait for a fish, he quoted. well, maybe i dont want to put the hook in my mouth. maybe whatever she
wants to do in tar valon is worse than if i dont go at all. maybe shes lying. the truth an aes sedai tells
is never the truth you think it is.
you have any more old sayings you want to rid yourself of? rand asked. a south wind brings a
warm guest, a north wind an empty house? a pig painted gold is still a pig? what about, talk shears no
sheep? a fools words are dust?
easy, rand, perrin said softly. there is no need to be so rough.
isnt there? maybe i dont want you two going with me, always hanging around, falling into trouble and
expecting me to pull you out. you ever think of that? burn me, did it ever occur to you i might be tired of
always having you there whenever i turn around? always there, and im tired of it. the hurt on perrins
face cut him like a knife, but he pushed on relentlessly. there are some here think im a lord. a lord.
maybe i like that. but look at you, dicing with stablehands. when i go, i go by myself. you two can go
to tar valon or go hang yourselves, but i leave here alone.
mats face had gone stiff, and he clutched the dagger through his coat till his knuckles were white. if that
is how you want it, he said coldly. i thought we were . . . however you want it, althor. but if i decide
to leave at the same time you do, ill go, and you can stand clear of me.
nobody is going anywhere, perrin said, if the gates are barred. he was staring at the floor again.
laughter rolled from the gamblers against the wall as someone lost.
go or stay, loial said, together or apart, it doesnt matter. you are all threetaveren . even i can see
it, and i dont have that talent, just by what happens around you. and moiraine sedai says it, too.
mat threw up his hands. no more, loial. i dont want to hear about that anymore.
loial shook his head. whether you hear it or not, it is still true. the wheel of time weaves the pattern



of the age, using the lives of men for thread. and you three aretaveren , centerpoints of the weaving.
no more, loial.
for a time, the wheel will bend the pattern around you three, whatever you do. and whatever you do
is more likely to be chosen by the wheel than by you.taveren pull history along behind them and shape
the pattern just by being, but the wheel weavestaveren on a tighter line than other men. wherever you
go and whatever you do, until the wheel chooses otherwise you will  
no more! mat shouted. the men dicing looked around, and he glared at them until they bent back to
their game.
i am sorry, mat, loial rumbled. i know i talk too much, but i did not mean  
i am not staying here, mat told the rafters, with a bigmouthed ogier and a fool whose head is too big
for a hat. you coming, perrin? perrin sighed, and glanced at rand, then nodded.
rand watched them go with a stick caught in his threat.i must go alone. light help me, i have to .
loial was staring after them, too, eyebrows drooping worriedly. rand, i really didnt mean to  
rand made his voice harsh. what are you waiting for? go on with them! i dont see why youre still
here. you are no use to me if you dont know a way out. go on! go find your trees, and your precious
groves, if they havent all been cut down, and good riddance to them if they have.
loials eyes, as big as cups, looked surprised and hurt, at first, but slowly they tightened into what almost
might be anger. rand did not think it could be. some of the old stories claimed ogier were fierce, though
they never said how, exactly, but rand had never met anyone as gentle as loial.
if you wish it so, rand althor, loial said stiffly. he gave a rigid bow and stalked away after mat and
perrin.
rand slumped against the stacked sacks of grain.well , a voice in his head taunted, you did it, didnt
you. i had to, he told it.i will be dangerous just to be around. blood and ashes, im going to go
mad, and . . .no! no, i wont! i will not use the power, and then i wont go mad, and . . .but i cant
risk it. i cant, dont you see? but the voice only laughed at him.
the gamblers were looking at him, he realized. all of them, still kneeling against the wall, had turned to
stare at him. shienarans of any class were almost always polite and correct, even to blood enemies, and
ogier were never any enemies of shienar. shock filled the gamblers eyes. their faces were blank, but
their eyes said what he had done was wrong. part of him thought they were right, and that drove their
silent accusation deep. they only looked at him, but he stumbled out of the storeroom as if they were
chasing him.
numbly he went on through the storerooms, hunting a place to secrete himself until some traffic was
allowed through the gates again. then he could hide in the bottom of a victualers cart, maybe. if they did
not search the carts on the way out. if they did not search the storerooms, search the whole keep for
him. stubbornly he refused to think about that, stubbornly concentrated on finding a safe place. but every
place he found  a hollow in a stack of grain sacks, a narrow alley along the wall behind some wine
barrels, an abandoned storeroom half filled with empty crates and shadows  he could imagine
searchers finding him there. he could imagine that unseen watcher, whoever it was  or whatever 



finding him there, too. so he hunted on, thirsty and dusty and with cobwebs in his hair.
and then he came out into a dimly torchlit corridor, and egwene was creeping along it, pausing to peer
into the storerooms she passed. her dark hair, hanging to her waist, was caught back with a red ribbon,
and she wore a goosegray dress in the shienaran fashion, trimmed in red. at the sight of her, sadness
and loss rolled over him, worse than when he had chased mat and perrin and loial away. he had grown
up thinking he would marry egwene one day; they both had. but now. . .
she jumped when he popped out right in front of her, and her breath caught loudly, but what she said
was, so there you are. mat and perrin told me what you did. and loial. i know what youre trying to
do, rand, and it is plain foolish. she crossed her arms under her breasts, and her big, dark eyes fixed
him sternly. he always wondered how she managed to seem to be looking down at him  she did it at
will  although she was only as tall as his chest, and two years younger besides.
good, he said. her hair suddenly made him angry. he had never seen a grown woman with her hair
unbraided until he left the two rivers. there, every girl waited eagerly for the womens circle of her
village to say she was old enough to braid her hair. egwene certainly had. and here she was with her hair
loose except for a ribbon.i want to go home and cant, and she cant wait to forget emonds field .
you go away and leave me alone, too. you dont want to keep company with a shepherd anymore.
there are plenty of aes sedai here for you to moon around, now. and dont tell any of them you saw
me. theyre after me, and i dont need you helping them.
bright spots of color bloomed in her cheeks. do you think i would  
he turned to walk away, and with a cry she threw herself at him, flung her arms around his legs. they
both tumbled to the stone floor, his saddlebags and bundles flying. he grunted when he hit, sword hilt
digging into his side, and again when she scrabbled up and plopped herself down on his back as if he
were a chair. my mother, she said firmly, always told me the best way to learn to deal with a man was
to learn to ride a mule. she said they have about equal brains most of the time. sometimes the mule is
smarter.
he raised his head to look over his shoulder at her. get off me, egwene. get off! egwene, if you dont
get off  he lowered his voice ominously  ill do something to you. you know what i am. he
added a glare for good measure.
egwene sniffed. you wouldnt, if you could. you would not hurt anybody. but you cant, anyway. i
know you cannot channel the one power whenever you want; it just happens, and you cannot control it.
so you are not going to do anything to me or anybody else. i, on the other hand, have been taking
lessons with moiraine, so if you dont listen to some sense, rand althor, i might just set your breeches
on fire. i can manage that much. you keep on as you are and see if i cannot. suddenly, for just a
moment, the torch nearest them on the wall flared up with a roar. she gave a squeak and stared at it,
startled.
twisting around, he grabbed her arm, pulled her off his back, and sat her against the wall. when he sat
up himself, she was sitting there across from him, rubbing her arm furiously. you really would have,
wouldnt you? he said angrily. youre fooling with things you dont understand. you could have burned
both of us to charcoal!
men! when you cannot win an argument, you either run away or resort to force.
hold on there! who tripped who? who sat on who? and you threatened  tried!  to   he



raised both hands. no, you dont. you do this to me all the time. whenever you realize the argument
isnt going the way you want, suddenly we are arguing about something else completely. not this time.
i am not arguing, she said calmly, and i am not changing the subject, either. what is hiding except
running away? and after you hide, youll run away for true. and what about hurting mat, and perrin, and
loial? and me? i know why. youre afraid you will hurt somebody even worse if you let them stay near
you. if you dont do what you shouldnt, then you do not have to worry about hurting anybody. all this
running around and striking out, and you dont even know if theres a reason. why should the amyrlin, or
any aes sedai but moiraine, even know you exist?
for a moment he stared at her. the longer she spent with moiraine and nynaeve, the more she took on
their manner, at least when she wanted to. they were much alike at times, the aes sedai and the
wisdom, distant and knowing. it was disconcerting coming from egwene. finally he told her what lan
had said. what else could he mean?
her hand froze on her arm, and she frowned with concentration. moiraine knows about you, and she
hasnt done anything, so why should she now? but if lan . . . still frowning, she met his eyes. the
storerooms are the first place they will look. if they do look. until we find out if they are looking, we
need to put you somewhere they would never think of searching. i know. the dungeon.
he scrambled to his feet. the dungeon!
not in a cell, silly. i go there some evenings to visit padan fain. nynaeve does, too. no one will think it
odd if i go early today. in truth, with everybody looking to the amyrlin, no one will even notice us.
but, moiraine . . .
she doesnt go the dungeons to question master fain. she has him brought to her. and she has not
done that very much for weeks. believe me, you will be safe there.
still, he hesitated. padan fain. why do you visit the peddler, anyway? hes a darkfriend, admitted out
of his own mouth, and a bad one. burn me, egwene, he brought the trollocs to emonds field! the
dark ones hound, he called himself, and he has been sniffing on my trail since winternight.
well, he is safe behind iron bars now, rand. it was her turn to hesitate, and she looked at him almost
pleading. rand, he has brought his wagon into the two rivers every spring since before i was born. he
knows all the people i know, all the places. its strange, but the longer he has been locked up, the easier
in himself he has become. its almost as if he is breaking free of the dark one. he laughs again, and tells
funny stories, about emonds field folk, and sometimes about places i never heard of before. sometimes
he is almost like his old self. i just like to talk to somebody about home.
since ive been avoiding you, he thought,and since perrins been avoiding everybody, and mats
been spending all his time gambling and carousing . i shouldnt have kept to myself so much, he
muttered, then sighed. well, if moiraine thinks its safe enough for you, i suppose it is safe enough for
me. but theres no need for you to be mixed in it.
egwene got to her feet and concentrated on brushing off her dress, avoiding his eye.
moirainehas said its safe? egwene?
moiraine sedai has never told me i could not visit master fain, she said carefully.



he stared at her, then burst out, you never asked her. she doesnt know. egwene, thats stupid. padan
fains a darkfriend, and as bad as ever a darkfriend was.
he is locked in a cage, she said stiffly, and i do not have to ask moiraines permission for everything i
do. it is a little late for you to start worrying about doing what an aes sedai thinks, isnt it? now, are you
coming?
i can find the dungeon without you. they are looking for me, or will be, and it wont do you any good
to be found with me.
without me, she said dryly, youll likely trip over your own feet and fall in the amyrlin seats lap, then
confess everything while trying to talk your way out of it.
blood and ashes, you ought to be in the womens circle back home. if men were all as fumblefooted
and helpless as you seem to think, wed never  
are you going to stand here talking until they do find you? pick up your things, rand, and come with
me. not waiting for an answer, she spun around and started off down the hall. muttering under his
breath, he reluctantly obeyed.
there were few people  servants, mainly  in the back ways they took, but rand had the feeling that
they all took special notice of him. not notice of a man burdened for a journey, but ofhim , rand althor
in particular. he knew it was his imagination  he hoped it was  but even so, he felt no relief when
they stopped in a passageway deep beneath the keep, before a tall door with a small iron grill set in it, as
thickly strapped with iron as any in the outer wall. a clapper hung below the grill.
through the grill rand could see bare walls, and two topknotted soldiers sitting bareheaded at a table
with a lamp on it. one of the men was sharpening a dagger with long, slow strokes of a stone. his
strokes never faltered when egwene rapped with the clapper, a sharp clang of iron on iron. the other
man, his face flat and sullen, looked at the door as if considering before he finally rose and came over. he
was squat and stocky, barely tall enough to look through the crosshatched bars.
what do you want? oh, its you again, girl. come to see your darkfriend? whos that? he made no
move to open the door.
hes a friend of mine, changu. he wants to see master fain, too.
the man studied rand, his upper lip quivering back to bare teeth. rand did not think it was supposed to
be a smile. well, changu said finally. well. tall, arent you? tall. and fancy dressed for your kind.
somebody catch you young in the eastern marches and tame you? he slammed back the bolts and
yanked open the door. well, come in if youre coming. he took on a mocking tone. take care not to
bump your head, my lord.
there was no danger of that; the door was tall enough for loial. rand followed egwene in, frowning and
wondering if this changu meant to make some sort of trouble. he was the first rude shienaran rand had
met; even masema was only cold, not really rude. but the fellow just banged the door shut and rammed
the heavy bolts home, then went to some shelves beyond the end of the table and took one of the lamps
there. the other man never ceased stropping his knife, never even looked up from it. the room was bare
except for the table and benches and shelves, with straw on the floor and another ironbound door
leading deeper in.



youll want some light, wont you, changu said, in there in the dark with your darkfriend friend. he
laughed, coarse and humorless, and lit the lamp. hes waiting for you. he thrust the lamp at egwene,
and undid the inner door almost eagerly. waiting for you. in there, in the dark.
rand paused uneasily at the blackness beyond, and changu grinning behind, but egwene caught his
sleeve and pulled him in. the door slammed, almost catching his heel; the latch bars clanged shut. there
was only the light of the lamp, a small pool around them in the darkness.
are you sure hell let us out? he asked. the man had never even looked at his sword or bow, he
realized, never asked what was in his bundles. they arent very good guards. we could be here to
break fain free for all he knows.
they know me better than that, she said, but she sounded troubled, and she added, they seem worse
every time i come. all the guards do. meaner, and more sullen. changu told jokes the first time i came,
and nidao never even speaks anymore. but i suppose working in a place like this cant give a man a light
heart. maybe it is just me. this place does not do my heart any good, either. despite her words, she
drew him confidently into the black. he kept his free hand on his sword.
the pale lamplight showed a wide hall with flat iron grills to either side, fronting stonewalled cells. only
two of the cells they passed held prisoners. the occupants sat up on their narrow cots as the light struck
them, shielding their eyes with their hands, glaring between their fingers. even with their faces hidden,
rand was sure they were glaring. their eyes glittered in the lamplight.
that one likes to drink and fight, egwene murmured, indicating a burly fellow with sunken knuckles.
this time he wrecked the common room of an inn in the town singlehanded, and hurt some men badly.
the other prisoner wore a goldembroidered coat with wide sleeves, and low, gleaming boots. he tried
to leave the city without settling his inn bill  she sniffed loudly at that; her father was an innkeeper as
well as mayor of emonds field  nor paying half a dozen shopkeepers and merchants what he owed.
the men snarled at them, guttural curses as bad as any rand had heard from merchants guards.
they grow worse every day, too, she said in a tight voice, and quickened her step.
she was enough ahead of him when they reached padan fains cell, at the very end, that rand was out
of the light entirely. he stopped there, in the shadows behind her lamp.
fain was sitting on his cot, leaning forward expectantly as if waiting, just as changu had said. he was a
bony, sharpeyed man, with long arms and a big nose, even more gaunt now than rand remembered.
not gaunt from the dungeon  the food here was the same as the servants ate, and not even the worst
prisoner was shorted  but from what he had done before coming to fal dara.
the sight of him brought back memories rand would just as soon have done without. fain on the seat of
his big peddlers wagon wheeling across the wagon bridge, arriving in emonds field the day of
winternight. and on winternight the trollocs came, killing and burning, hunting. hunting three young
men, moiraine had said.hunting me, if they only knew it, and using fain for their trail hound .
fain stood at egwenes approach, not shielding his eyes or even blinking at the light. he smiled at her, a
smile that touched only his lips, then raised his eyes above her head. looking straight at rand, hidden in
the blackness behind the light, he pointed a long finger at him. i feel you there, hiding, rand althor, he
said, almost crooning. you cant hide, not from me, and not from them. you thought it was over, did you



not? but the battles never done, althor. they are coming for me, and theyre coming for you, and the
war goes on. whether you live or die, its never over for you. never. suddenly he began to chant.
soon comes the day all shall be free.
even you, and even me.
soon comes the day all shall die.
surely you, but never i.
he let his arm fall, and his eyes rose to stare intently at an angle up into the darkness. a crooked grin
twisting his mouth, he chuckled deep in his throat as if whatever he saw was amusing. mordeth knows
more than all of you. mordeth knows.
egwene backed away from the cell until she reached rand, and only the edge of the light touched the
bars of fains cell. darkness hid the peddler, but they could still hear his chuckles. even unable to see
him, rand was sure fain was still peering off at nothing.
with a shiver, he pried his fingers off his sword hilt. light! he said hoarsely. this is what you call being
like he used to be?
sometimes hes better, and sometimes worse. egwenes voice was unsteady. this is worse  much
worse than usual.
what is he seeing, i wonder. hes mad, staring at a stone ceiling in the dark.if the stone werent
there, hed he looking straight at the womens apartments. where moiraine is, and the amyrlin
seat . he shivered again. hes mad.
this was not a good idea, rand. looking over her shoulder at the cell, she drew him away from it and
lowered her voice as if afraid fain might overhear. fains chuckles followed them. even if they dont
look here, i cannot stay here with him like this, and i do not think you should, either. there is something
about him today that . . . she drew a shaky breath. there is one place even safer from search than
here. i did not mention it before because it was easier to get you in here, but they will never look in the
womens apartments. never.
the womens . . . ! egwene, fain may be mad, but youre madder. you cant hide from hornets in a
hornets nest.
what better place? what is the one part of the keep no man will enter without a womans invitation, not
even lord agelmar? what is the one place no one would ever think to look for a man?
what is the one place in the keep sure to be full of aes sedai? it is crazy, egwene.
poking at his bundles, she spoke as if it were all decided. you must wrap your sword and bow in your
cloak, and then it will look as if you are carrying things for me. it should not be too hard to find you a
jerkin and a shirt that isnt so pretty. you will have to stoop, though.
i told you, i wont do it.
since youre acting stubborn as a mule, you should take right to playing my beast of burden. unless you
would really rather stay down here with him.
fains laughing whisper came through the black shadows. the battles never done, althor. mordeth



knows.
id have a better chance jumping off the wall, rand muttered. but he unslung his bundles and set about
wrapping sword and bow and quiver as she had suggested.
in the darkness, fain laughed. its never over, althor. never.

chapter 4

summoned
alone in her rooms in the womens apartments, moiraine adjusted the shawl, embroidered with curling
ivy and grapevines, on her shoulders and studied the effect in the tall frame mirror standing in a corner.
her large, dark eyes could appear as sharp as a hawks when she was angry. they seemed to pierce the
silvered glass, now. it was only happenstance that she had had the shawl in her saddlebags when she
came to fal dara. with the blazing white flame of tar valon centered on the wearers back and long
fringe colored to show her ajah  moiraines was as blue as a morning sky  the shawls were seldom
worn outside tar valon, and even there usually only inside the white tower. little in tar valon besides
a meeting of the hall of the tower called for the formality of the shawls, and beyond the shining walls a
sight of the flame would send too many people running, to hide or perhaps to fetch the children of the
light. a whitecloaks arrow was as fatal to an aes sedai as to anyone else, and the children were too
wily to let an aes sedai see the bowman before the arrow struck, while she still might do something
about it. moiraine had certainly never expected to wear the shawl in fal dara. but for an audience with
the amyrlin, there were proprieties to observe.
she was slender and not at all tall, and smoothcheeked aes sedai agelessness often made her appear
younger than she was, but moiraine had a commanding grace and calm presence that could dominate any
gathering. a manner ingrained growing up in the royal palace of cairhien had been heightened, not
submerged, by still more years as an aes sedai. she knew she might need every bit of it today. yet
much of the calm was on the surface, today.there must be trouble, or she would not have come
herself , she thought for at least the tenth time. but beyond that lay a thousand questions more.what
trouble, and who did she choose to accompany her? why here? why now? it cannot be allowed to
go wrong now .
the great serpent ring on her right hand caught the light dully as she touched the delicate golden chain
fastened in her dark hair, which hung in waves to her shoulders. a small, clear blue stone dangled from
the chain, in the middle of her forehead. many in the white tower knew of the tricks she could do using
that stone as a focus. it was only a polished bit of blue crystal, just something a young girl had used in her
first learning, with no one to guide her. that girl had remembered tales ofangreal and even more
powerfulsaangreal  those fabled remnants of the age of legends that allowed aes sedai to channel
more of the one power than any could safely handle unaided  remembered and thought some such



focus was required to channel at all. her sisters in the white tower knew a few of her tricks, and
suspected others, including some that did not exist, some that had shocked her when she learned of them.
the things she did with the stone were simple and small, if occasionally useful; the kind a child would
imagine. but if the wrong women had accompanied the amyrlin, the crystal might put them off balance,
because of the tales.
a rapid, insistent knocking came at the chamber door. no shienaran would knock that way, not at
anyones door, but least of all hers. she remained looking into the mirror until her eyes stared back
serenely, all thought hidden in their dark depths. she checked the soft leather pouch hanging at her belt.
whatever troubles brought her out of tar valon, she will forget them when i lay this trouble
before her . a second thumping, even more vigorous than the first, sounded before she crossed the
room and opened the door with a calm smile for the two women who had come for her.
she recognized them both. darkhaired anaiya in her bluefringed shawl, and fairhaired liandrin in her
red. liandrin, not only youngseeming but young and pretty, with a dolls face and a small, petulant
mouth, had her hand raised to pound again. her dark brows and darker eyes were a sharp contrast to
the multitude of pale honey braids brushing her shoulders, but the combination was not uncommon in
tarabon. both women were taller than moiraine, though liandrin by less than a hand.
anaiyas blunt face broke into a smile as soon as moiraine opened the door. that smile gave her the
only beauty she would ever have, but it was enough; almost everyone felt comforted, safe and special,
when anaiya smiled at them. the light shine on you, moiraine. its good to see you again. are you
well? it has been so long.
my heart is lighter for your presence, anaiya. that was certainly true; it was good to know she had at
least one friend among the aes sedai who had come to fal dara. the light illumine you.
liandrins mouth tightened, and she gave her shawl a twitch. the amyrlin seat, she requires your
presence, sister. her voice was petulant, too, and coldedged. not for moiraines sake, or not solely;
liandrin always sounded dissatisfied with something. frowning, she tried to look over moiraines
shoulder into the room. this chamber, it is warded. we cannot enter. why do you ward against your
sisters?
against all, moiraine replied smoothly. many of the serving women are curious about aes sedai, and
i do not want them pawing through my rooms when i am not here. there was no need to make a
distinction until now. she pulled the door shut behind her, leaving all three of them in the corridor. shall
we go? we must not keep the amyrlin waiting.
she started down the hallway with anaiya chatting at her side. liandrin stood for a moment staring at the
door as if wondering what moiraine was hiding, then hurried to join the others. she bracketed moiraine,
walking as stiffly as a guard. anaiya merely walked, keeping company. their slippered footsteps fell
softly on thickwoven carpets with simple patterns.
liveried women curtsied deeply as they passed, many more deeply than they would have for the lord of
fal dara himself. aes sedai, three together, and the amyrlin seat herself in the keep; it was more honor
than any woman of the keep had ever expected in her lifetime. a few women of noble houses were out
in the halls, and they curtsied, too, which they most certainly would not have done for lord agelmar.
moiraine and anaiya smiled and bowed their heads to acknowledge each reverence, from servant or
noble equally. liandrin ignored them all.
there were only women here, of course, no men. no shienaran male above the age of ten would enter



the womens rooms without permission or invitation, although a few small boys ran and played in the halls
here. they knelt on one knee, awkwardly, when their sisters dropped deep curtsies. now and then
anaiya smiled and ruffled a small head as she passed.
this time, moiraine, anaiya said, you have been gone from tar valon too long. much too long. tar
valon misses you. your sisters miss you. and you are needed in the white tower.
some of us must work in the world, moiraine said gently. i will leave the hall of the tower to you,
anaiya. yet in tar valon, you hear more of what occurs in the world than i. too often i outrun what
happens where i was yesterday. what news have you?
three more false dragons. liandrin bit the words off. in saldaea, murandy, and tear false dragons
ravage the land. the while, you blues smile and talk of nothing, and try to hold on to the past. anaiya
raised an eyebrow, and liandrin snapped her mouth shut with a sharp sniff.
three, moiraine mused softly. for an instant her eyes gleamed, but she masked it quickly. three in
the last two years, and now three more at once.
as the others were, these will be dealt with also. this male vermin and any ragtag rabble who follow
their banners.
moiraine was almost amused by the certainty in liandrins voice. almost. she was too aware of the
realities, too aware of the possibilities. have a few months been enough for you to forget, sister? the
last false dragon all but tore ghealdan apart before his army, ragtag rabble or not, was defeated. yes,
logain is in tar valon by now, gentled and safe, i suppose, but some of our sisters died to overpower
him. even one sister dead is more loss than we can bear, but ghealdans losses were much worse. the
two before logain could not channel, yet even so the people of kandor and arad doman remember
them well. villages burned and men dead in battle. how easily can the world deal with three at one time?
how many will flock to their banners? there has never been a shortage of followers for any man claiming
to be the dragon reborn. how great will the wars be this time?
it isnt so grim as that, anaiya said. as far as we know, only the one in saldaea can channel. he has
not had time to attract many followers, and sisters should already be there to deal with him. the tarens
are harrying their false dragon and his followers through haddon mirk, while the fellow in murandy is
already in chains. she gave a short, wondering laugh. to think the murandians, of all people, would
deal with theirs so quickly. ask, and they do not even call themselves murandians, but lugarders, or
inishlinni, or this or that lords or ladys man. yet for fear one of their neighbors would take the excuse to
invade, the murandians leaped on their false dragon almost as soon as he opened his mouth to proclaim
himself.
still, moiraine said, three at the same time cannot be ignored. has any sister been able to do a
foretelling? it was a slight chance  few aes sedai had manifested any part of that talent, even the
smallest part, in centuries  so she was not surprised when anaiya shook her head. not surprised, but a
little relieved.
they reached a juncture of hallways at the same time as the lady amalisa. she dropped a full curtsy,
bowing deep and spreading her pale green skirts wide. honor to tar valon, she murmured. honor to
aes sedai.
the sister of the lord of fal dara required more than a nod of the head. moiraine took amalisas hands
and drew her to her feet. you honor us, amalisa. rise, sister.



amalisa straightened gracefully, with a flush on her face. she had never as much as been to tar valon,
and to be called sister by an aes sedai was heady even for someone of her rank. short and of middle
years, she had a dark, mature beauty, and the color in her cheeks set it off. you honor me too greatly,
moiraine sedai.
moiraine smiled. how long have we known each other, amalisa? must i now call you my lady
amalisa, as if we had never sat over tea together?
of course not. amalisa smiled back. the strength evident in her brothers face was in hers, too, and no
less for the softer line of cheek and jaw. there were those who said that as hard and renowned a fighter
as agelmar was, he was no better than an even match for his sister. but with the amyrlin seat here . . .
when king easar visits fal dara, in private i call himmagami , little uncle, as i did when i was a child
and he gave me rides on his shoulder, but in public it must be different.
anaiyatsked . sometimes formality is necessary, but men often make more of it than they must. please,
call me anaiya, and i will call you amalisa, if i may.
from the corner of her eye, moiraine saw egwene, far down the side hall, disappearing hurriedly around
a corner. a stooped shape in a leather jerkin, head down and arms loaded with bundles, shambled at her
heels. moiraine permitted herself a small smile, quickly masked.if the girl shows as much initiative in
tar valon , she thought wryly,she will sit in the amyrlin seat one day. if she can learn to control
that initiative. if there is an amyrlin seat left on which to sit .
when she turned her attention back to the others, liandrin was speaking.
. . . and i would welcome the chance to learn more of your land. she wore a smile, open and almost
girlish, and her voice was friendly.
moiraine schooled her face to stillness as amalisa extended an invitation to join her and her ladies in her
private garden, and liandrin accepted warmly. liandrin made few friends, and none outside the red
ajah.certainly never outside the aes sedai. she would sooner make friends with a man, or a
trolloc . moiraine was not sure liandrin saw much difference between men and trollocs. she was not
sure any of the red ajah did.
anaiya explained that just now they must attend the amyrlin seat. of course, amalisa said. the light
illumine her, and the creator shelter her. but later, then. she stood straight and bowed her head as they
left her.
moiraine studied liandrin as they walked, never looking at her directly. the honeyhaired aes sedai
was staring straight ahead, rosebud lips pursed thoughtfully. she appeared to have forgotten moiraine
and anaiya both.what is she up to?
anaiya seemed not to have noticed anything out of the ordinary, but then she always managed to accept
people both as they were and as they wanted to be. it constantly amazed moiraine that anaiya dealt as
well as she did in the white tower, but those who were devious always seemed to take her openness
and honesty, her acceptance of everyone, as cunning devices. they were always caught completely off
balance when she turned out to mean what she said and say what she meant. too, she had a way of
seeing to the heart of things. and of accepting what she saw. now she blithely resumed speaking of the
news.



the word from andor is both good and bad. the street riots in caemlyn died down with the coming of
spring, but there is still talk, too much talk, blaming the queen, and tar valon as well, for the long winter.
morgase holds her throne less securely than she did last year, but she holds it still, and will so long as
gareth bryne is captaingeneral of the queens guards. and the lady elayne, the daughterheir, and
her brother, the lord gawyn, have come safely to tar valon for their training. there was some fear in
the white tower that the custom would be broken.
not while morgase has breath in her body, moiraine said.
liandrin gave a little start, as if she had just awakened. pray that she continues to have breath. the
daughterheirs party was followed to the river erinin by the children of the light. to the very bridges
to tar valon. more still camp outside caemlyn, for the chance of mischief, and inside caemlyn still are
those who listen.
perhaps it is time morgase learned a little caution, anaiya sighed. the world is becoming more
dangerous every day, even for a queen. perhaps especially for a queen. she was ever headstrong. i
remember when she came to tar valon as a girl. she did not have the ability to become a full sister, and
it rankled in her. sometimes i think she pushes her daughter because of that, whatever the girl chooses.
moiraine sniffed disdainfully. elayne was born with the spark in her; it was not a matter of choosing.
morgase would not risk letting the girl die from lack of training if all the whitecloaks in amadicia were
camped outside caemlyn. she would command gareth byrne and the queens guards to cut a path
through them to tar valon, and gareth byrne would do it if he had to do it alone.but she still must
keep the full extent of the girls potential secret. would the people of andor knowingly accept
elayne on the lion throne after morgase if they knew? not just a queen trained in tar valon
according to custom, but a full aes sedai? in all of recorded history there had been only a handful of
queens with the right to be called aes sedai, and the few who let it be known had all lived to regret it.
she felt a touch of sadness. but too much was afoot to spare aid, or even worry, for one land and one
throne. what else, anaiya?
you must know that the great hunt of the horn has been called in illian, the first time in four hundred
years. the illianers say the last battle is coming  anaiya gave a little shiver, as well she might, but
went on without a pause  and the horn of valere must be found before the final battle against the
shadow. men from every land are already gathering, all eager to be part of the legend, eager to find the
horn. murandy and altara are on their toes, of course, thinking its all a mask for a move against one of
them. that is probably why the murandians caught their false dragon so quickly. in any case, there will
be a new lot of stories for the bards and gleemen to add to the cycle. the light send it is only new
stories.
perhaps not the stories they expect, moiraine said. liandrin looked at her sharply, and she kept her
face still.
i suppose not, anaiya said placidly. the stories they least expect will be exactly the ones they will add
to the cycle. beyond that, i have only rumor to offer. the sea folk are agitated, their ships flying from
port to port with barely a pause. sisters from the islands say the coramoor, their chosen one, is coming,
but they wont say more. you know how closemouthed the athaan miere are with outsiders about the
coramoor, and in this our sisters seem to think more as sea folk than aes sedai. the aiel appear to be
stirring, too, but no one knows why. no one ever knows with the aiel. at least there is no evidence they
mean to cross the spine of the world again, thank the light. she sighed and shook her head. what i
would not give for even one sister from among the aiel. just one. we know too little of them.



moiraine laughed. sometimes i think you belong in the brown ajah, anaiya.
almoth plain, liandrin said, and looked surprised that she had spoken.
now that trulyis a rumor, sister, anaiya said. a few whispers heard as we were leaving tar valon.
there may be fighting on almoth plain, and perhaps toman head, as well. i say, may be. the whispers
were faint. rumors of rumors. we left before we could hear more.
it would have to be tarabon and arad doman, moiraine said, and shook her head. they have
squabbled over almoth plain for nearly three hundred years, but it has never come to open blows. she
looked at liandrin; aes sedai were supposed to throw off all their old loyalties to lands and rulers, but
few did so completely. it was hard not to care for the land of your birth. why would they now  ?
enough of idle talk, the honeyhaired woman broke in angrily. for you, moiraine, the amyrlin waits.
she took three quick strides ahead of the others and threw open one of a pair of tall doors. for you, the
amyrlin will have no idle talk.
unconsciously touching the pouch at her waist, moiraine went past liandrin through the doorway, with a
nod as if the other woman were holding the door for her. she did not even smile at the white flash of
anger on liandrins face.what isthe wretched girl up to?
brightly colored carpets covered the anteroom floor in layers, and the room was pleasantly furnished
with chairs and cushioned benches and small tables, the wood simply worked or just polished. brocaded
curtains sided the tall arrowslits to make them seem more like windows. no fires burned in the fireplaces;
the day was warm, and the shienaran chill would not come until nightfall.
fewer than half a dozen of the aes sedai who had accompanied the amyrlin were there. verin mathwin
and serafelle, of the brown ajah, did not look up at moiraines entrance. serafelle was intently reading
an old book with a worn, faded leather cover, handling its tattered pages carefully, while plump verin,
sitting crosslegged beneath an arrowslit, held a small blossom up to the light and made notes and
sketches in a precise hand in a book balanced on her knee. she had an open inkpot on the floor beside
her, and a small pile of flowers on her lap. the brown sisters concerned themselves with little beside
seeking knowledge. moiraine sometimes wondered if they were really aware of what was going on in the
world, or even immediately around them.
the three other women already in the room turned, but they made no effort to approach moiraine, only
looked at her. one, a slender woman of the yellow ajah, she did not know; she spent too little time in
tar valon to know all the aes sedai, although their numbers were no longer very great. she was
acquainted with the two remaining, however. carlinya was as pale of skin and cold of manner as the
white fringe on her shawl, the exact opposite in every way of dark, fiery alanna mosvani, of the green,
but they both stood and stared at her without speaking, without expression. alanna sharply snugged her
shawl around her, but carlinya made no move at all. the slender yellow sister turned away with an air of
regret.
the light illumine you all, sisters, moiraine said. no one answered. she was not sure serafelle or
verin had even heard.where are the others? there was no need for them all to be there  most would
be resting in their rooms, freshing from the journey  but she was on edge now, all the questions she
could not ask running through her head. none of it showed on her face.
the inner door opened, and leane appeared, without her giltflamed staff. the keeper of the
chronicles was as tall as most men, willowy and graceful, still beautiful, with coppery skin and short,



dark hair. she wore a blue stole, a hand wide, instead of a shawl, for she sat in the hall of the tower,
though as keeper, not to represent her ajah.
there you are, she said briskly to moiraine, and gestured to the door behind her. come, sister. the
amyrlin seat is waiting. she spoke naturally in a clipped, quick way that never changed, whether she
was angry or joyful or excited. as moiraine followed leane in, she wondered what emotion the keeper
was feeling now. leane pulled the door to behind them; it banged shut with something of the sound of a
cell door closing.
the amyrlin seat herself sat behind a broad table in the middle of the carpet, and on the table rested a
flattened cube of gold, the size of a travel chest and ornately worked with silver. the table was heavily
built, its legs stout, but it seemed to squat under a weight two strong men would have had trouble lifting.
at the sight of the golden cube moiraine had difficulty keeping her face unruffled. the last she had seen
of it, it had been safely locked in agelmars strongroom. on learning of the amyrlin seats arrival she had
meant to tell her of it herself. that it was already in the amyrlins possession was a trifle, but a worrisome
trifle. events could be outpacing her.
she swept a deep curtsy and said formally, as you called me, mother, so have i come. the amyrlin
extended her hand, and moiraine kissed her great serpent ring, no different from that of any other aes
sedai. rising, she made her tone more conversational, but not too much so. she was aware of the
keeper standing behind her, beside the door. i hope you had a pleasant journey, mother.
the amyrlin had been born in tear, of a simple fishermans family, not a noble house, and her name
was siuan sanche, though very few had used that name, or even thought of it, in the ten years since she
had been raised from the hall of the tower. she was the amyrlin seat; that was the whole of it. the
broad stole on her shoulders was striped in the colors of the seven ajahs; the amyrlin was of all ajahs
and of none. she was only of medium height, and handsome rather than beautiful, but her face held a
strength that had been there before her elevation, the strength of the girl who had survived the streets of
the maule, tears port district, and her clear blue gaze had made kings and queens, and even the captain
commander of the children of the light, drop their eyes. her own eyes were strained, now, and there
was a new tightness to her mouth.
we called the winds to speed our vessels up the erinin, daughter, and even turned the currents to our
aid. the amyrlins voice was deep, and sad. i have seen the flooding we caused in villages along the
river, and the light only knows what we have done to the weather. we will not have endeared ourselves
by the damage weve done and the crops we may have ruined. all to reach here as quickly as possible.
her eyes strayed to the ornate golden cube, and she half lifted a hand as if to touch it, but when she
spoke it was to say, elaida is in tar valon, daughter. she came with elayne and gawyn.
moiraine was conscious of leane standing to one side, quiet as always in the presence of the amyrlin.
but watching, and listening. i am surprised, mother, she said carefully. this is no time for morgase to
be without aes sedai counsel. morgase was one of the few rulers to openly admit to an aes sedai
councilor; almost all had one, but few admitted it.
elaida insisted, daughter, and queen or not, i doubt morgase is a match for elaida in a contest of wills.
in any case, perhaps this time she did not wish to be. elayne has potential. more than i have ever seen
before. already she shows progress. the red sisters are swollen up like pufffish with it. i dont think the
girl leans to their way of thinking, but she is, young, and there is no telling. even if they dont manage to
bend her, it will make little difference. elayne could well be the most powerful aes sedai in a thousand
years, and it is the red ajah who found her. they have gained much status in the hall from the girl.



i have two young women with me in fal dara, mother, moiraine said. both from the two rivers,
where the blood of manetheren still runs strong, though they do not even remember there was once a
land called manetheren. the old blood sings, mother, and it sings loudly in the two rivers. egwene, a
village girl, is at least as strong as elayne. i have seen the daughterheir, and i know. as for the other,
nynaeve was the wisdom in their village, yet she is little more than a girl herself. it says something of her
that the women of her village chose her wisdom at her age. once she gains conscious control of what
she now does without knowing, she will be as strong as any in tar valon. with training, she will shine like
a bonfire beside the candles of elayne and egwene. and there is no chance these two will choose the
red. they are amused by men, exasperated by them, but they do like them. they will easily counter
whatever influence the red ajah gains in the white tower from finding elayne.
the amyrlin nodded as if it were all of no consequence. moiraines eyebrows lifted in surprise before
she caught herself and smoothed her features. those were the two main concerns in the hall of the
tower, that fewer girls who could be trained to channel the one power were found every year, or so it
seemed, and that fewer of real power were found. worse than the fear in those who blamed aes sedai
for the breaking of the world, worse than the hatred from the children of the light, worse even than the
workings of darkfriends, were the sheer dwindling of numbers and the lessening of abilities. the
corridors of the white tower were sparsely populated where once they had been crowded, and what
could once be done easily with the one power could now be done only with difficulty, or not at all.
elaida had another reason for coming to tar valon, daughter. she sent the same message by six
different pigeons to make sure i received it  and to whom else in tar valon she sent pigeons, i can
only guess  then came herself. she told the hall of the tower that you are meddling with a young man
who istaveren , and dangerous. he was in caemlyn, she said, but when she found the inn where he had
been staying, she discovered you had spirited him away.
the people at that inn served us well and faithfully, mother. if she harmed any of them . . . moiraine
could not keep the sharpness out of her voice, and she heard leane shift. one did not speak to the
amyrlin seat in that tone; not even a king on his throne did.
you should know, daughter, the amyrlin said dryly, that elaida harms no one except those she
considers dangerous. darkfriends, or those poor fool men who try to channel the one power. or one
who threatens tar valon. everyone else who isnt aes sedai might as well be pieces on a stones board
as far as she is concerned. luckily for him, the innkeeper, one master gill as i remember, apparently
thinks much of aes sedai, and so answered her questions to her satisfaction. elaida actually spoke well
of him. but she spoke more of the young man you took away with you. more dangerous than any man
since artur hawkwing, she said. she has the foretelling sometimes, you know, and her words carried
weight with the hall.
for leanes sake, moiraine made her voice as meek as she could. that was not very meek, but it was
the best she could do. i have three young men with me, mother, but none of them is a king, and i doubt
very much if any of them even dreams of uniting the world under one ruler. no one has dreamed artur
hawkwings dream since the war of the hundred years.
yes, daughter. village youths, so lord agelmar tells me. but one of them istaveren . the amyrlins
eyes strayed to the flattened cube again. it was put forward in the hall that you should be sent into
retreat for contemplation. this was proposed by one of the sitters for the green ajah, with the other two
nodding approval as she spoke.
leane made a sound of disgust, or perhaps frustration. she always kept in the background when the



amyrlin seat spoke, but moiraine could understand the small interruption this time. the green ajah had
been allied with the blue for a thousand years; since artur hawkwings time, they had all but spoken with
one voice. i have no desire to hoe vegetables in some remote village, mother.nor will i, whatever the
hall of the tower says .
it was further proposed, also by the greens, that your care during your retreat should be given to the
red ajah. the red sitters tried to appear surprised, but they looked like fisherbirds who knew the
catch was unguarded. the amyrlin sniffed. the reds professed reluctance to take custody of one not
of their ajah, but said they would accede to the wishes of the hall.
despite herself, moiraine shivered. that would be . . . most unpleasant, mother. it would be worse
than unpleasant, much worse; the reds were never gentle. she put the thought of it firmly to one side, to
deal with later. mother, i cannot understand this apparent alliance between the greens and the reds.
their beliefs, their attitudes toward men, their views of our very purposes as aes sedai, are completely
opposite. a red and a green cannot even talk to each other without coming to shouts.
things change, daughter. i am the fifth in a row raised to the amyrlin seat from the blue. perhaps they
feel that is too many, or that the blue way of thinking no longer suffices in a world full of false dragons.
after a thousand years, many things change. the amyrlin grimaced and spoke as if to herself. old walls
weaken, and old barriers fall. she shook herself, and her voice firmed. there was yet another proposal,
one that still smells like weekold fish on the jetty. since leane is of the blue ajah and i came from the
blue, it was put forward that sending two sisters of the blue with me on this journey would give the blue
four representatives. proposed in the hall, to my face, as if they were discussing repairing the drains.
two of the white sitters stood against me, and two green. the yellow muttered among themselves,
then would not speak for or against. one more saying nay, and your sisters anaiya and maigan would
not be here. there was even some talk, open talk, that i should not leave the white tower at all.
moiraine felt a greater shock than on hearing that the red ajah wanted her in their hands. whatever
ajah she came from, the keeper of the chronicles spoke only for the amyrlin, and the amyrlin spoke
for all aes sedai and all ajahs. that was the way it had always been, and no one had ever suggested
otherwise, not in the darkest days of the trolloc wars, not when artur hawkwings armies had penned
every surviving aes sedai inside tar valon. above all, the amyrlin seat was the amyrlin seat. every
aes sedai was pledged to obey her. no one could question what she did or where she chose to go. this
proposal went against three thousand years of custom and law.
who would dare, mother?
the amyrlin seats laugh was bitter. almost anyone, daughter. riots in caemlyn. the great hunt
called without any of us having a hint of it until the proclamation. false dragons popping up like redbells
after a rain. nations fading, and more nobles playing at the game of houses than at any time since artur
hawkwing cut all their plottings short. and worst of all, every one of us knows the dark one is stirring
again. show me a sister who does not think the white tower is losing its grip on events, and if she is not
brown ajah, she is dead. time may be growing short for all of us, daughter. sometimes i think i can
almost feel it growing shorter.
as you say, mother, things change. but there are still worse perils outside the shining walls than
within.
for a long moment the amyrlin met moiraines gaze, then nodded slowly. leave us, leane. i would
talk to my daughter moiraine alone.



there was only a moments hesitation before leane said, as you wish, mother. moiraine could feel
her surprise. the amyrlin gave few audiences without the keeper present, especially not to a sister she
had reason to chastise.
the door opened and closed behind leane. she would not say a word in the anteroom of what had
occurred inside, but the news that moiraine was alone with the amyrlin would spread through the aes
sedai in fal dara like wildfire through a dry forest, and the speculation would begin.
as soon as the door closed the amyrlin stood, and moiraine felt a momentary tingle in her skin as the
other woman channeled the one power. for an instant, the amyrlin seat seemed to her to be
surrounded by a nimbus of bright light.
i dont know that any of the others have your old trick, the amyrlin seat said, lightly touching the blue
stone on moiraines forehead with one finger, but most of us have some small tricks remembered from
childhood. in any event, no one can hear what we say now.
suddenly she threw her arms around moiraine, a warm hug between old friends; moiraine hugged back
as warmly.
you are the only one, moiraine, with whom i can remember who i was. even leane always acts as if i
hadbecome the stole and the staff, even when we are alone, as if wed never giggled together as novices.
sometimes i wish we still were novices, you and i. still innocent enough to see it all as a gleemans tale
come true, still innocent enough to think we would find men  they would be princes, remember,
handsome and strong and gentle?  who could bear to live with women of an aes sedais power. still
innocent enough to dream of the happy ending to the gleemans tale, of living our lives as other women
do, just with more than they.
we are aes sedai, siuan. we have our duty. even if you and i had not been born to channel, would
you give it up for a home and a husband, even a prince? i do not believe it. that is a village goodwifes
dream. not even the greens go so far.
the amyrlin stepped back. no, i would not give it up. most of the time, no. but there have been times
i envied that village goodwife. at this moment, i almost do. moiraine, if anyone, even leane, discovers
what we plan, we will both be stilled. and i cant say they would be wrong to do it.

chapter 5

the shadow in shienar
stilled. the word seemed to quiver in the air, almost visible. when it was done to a man who could
channel the power, who must be stopped before madness drove him to the destruction of all around him,



it was called gentling, but for aes sedai it was stilling. stilled. no longer able to channel the flow of the
one power. able to sensesaidar , the female half of the true source, but no longer having the ability to
touch it. remembering what was gone forever. so seldom had it been done that every novice was
required to learn the name of each aes sedai since the breaking of the world who had been stilled, and
her crime, but none could think of it without a shudder. women bore being stilled no better than men did
being gentled.
moiraine had known the risk from the first, and she knew it was necessary. that did not mean it was
pleasant to dwell on. her eyes narrowed, and only the gleam in them showed her anger, and her worry.
leane would follow you to the slopes of shayol ghul, siuan, and into the pit of doom. you cannot think
she would betray you.
no. but then, would she think it betrayal? is it betrayal to betray a traitor? do you never think of that?
never. what we do, siuan, is what must be done. we have both known it for nearly twenty years. the
wheel weaves as the wheel wills, and you and i were chosen for this by the pattern. we are a part of
the prophecies, and the prophecies must be fulfilled. must!
the prophecies must be fulfilled. we were taught that they will be, and must be, and yet that fulfillment
is treason to everything else we were taught. some would say to everything we stand for. rubbing her
arms, the amyrlin seat walked over to peer through the narrow arrowslit at the garden below. she
touched the curtains. here in the womens apartments they hang draperies to soften the rooms, and they
plant beautiful gardens, but there is no part of this place not purposemade for battle, death, and killing.
she continued in the same pensive tone. only twice since the breaking of the world has the amyrlin
seat been stripped of stole and staff.
tetsuan, who betrayed manetheren for jealousy of elisandes powers, and bonwhin, who tried to use
artur hawkwing for a puppet to control the world and so nearly destroyed tar valon.
the amyrlin continued her study of the garden. both of the red, and both replaced by amyrlin from
the blue. the reason there has not been an amyrlin chosen from the red since bonwhin, and the reason
the red ajah will take any pretext to pull down an amyrlin from the blue, all wrapped neatly together. i
have no wish to be the third to lose the stole and the staff, moiraine. for you, of course, it would mean
being stilled and put outside the shining walls.
elaida, for one, would never let me off so easily. moiraine watched her friends back intently.light,
what has come over her? she has never been like this before. where is her strength, her fire? but
it will not come to that, siuan.
the other woman went on as if she had not spoken. for me, it would be different. even stilled, an
amyrlin who has been pulled down cannot be allowed to wander about loose; she might be seen as a
martyr, become a rallying point for opposition. tetsuan and bonwhin were kept in the white tower as
servants. scullery maids, who could be pointed to as cautions as to what can happen to the mightiest. no
one can rally around a woman who must scrub floors and pots all day. pity her, yes, but not rally to her.
eyes blazing, moiraine leaned her fists on the table. look at me, siuan. look at me! are you saying
that you want to give up, after all these years, after all we have done? give up, and let the world go? and
all for fear of a switching for not getting the pots clean enough! she put into it all the scorn she could
summon, and was relieved when her friend spun to face her. the strength was still there, strained but still
there. those clear blue eyes were as hot with anger as her own.



i remember which of the two of us squealed the loudest when we were switched as novices. you had
lived a soft life in cairhien, moiraine. not like working a fishing boat. abruptly siuan slapped the table
with a loud crack. no, i am not suggesting giving up, but neither do i propose to watch everything slide
out of our handswhile i can do nothing! most of my troubles with the hall stem from you. even the
greens wonder why i havent called you to the tower and taught you a little discipline. half the sisters
with me think you should be handed over to the reds, and if that happens, you will wish you were a
novice again, with nothing worse to look forward to than a switching. light! if any of them remember we
were friends as novices, id be there beside you.
we had a plan! a plan, moiraine! locate the boy and bring him to tar valon, where we could hide
him, keep him safe and guide him. since you left the tower, i have had only two messages from you.
two! i feel as if im trying to sail the fingers of the dragon in the dark. one message to say you were
entering the two rivers, going to this village, this emonds field. soon, i thought. hes found, and shell
have him in hand soon. then word from caemlyn to say you were coming to shienar, to fal dara, not
tar valon. fal dara, with the blight almost close enough to touch. fal dara, where trollocs raid and
myrddraal ride as near every day as makes no difference. nearly twenty years of planning and searching,
and you toss all our plans practically in the dark ones face. are you mad?
now that she had stirred life in the other woman, moiraine returned to outward calm, herself. calm, but
firm insistence, too. the pattern pays no heed to human plans, siuan. with all our scheming, we forgot
what we were dealing with.taveren . elaida is wrong. artur paendrag tanreall was never this strongly
taveren . the wheel will weave the pattern around this young man asit wills, whatever our plans.
the anger left amyrlins face, replaced by whitefaced shock. it sounds as ifyou are saying we might as
well give up. doyou now suggest standing aside and watching the world burn?
no, siuan. never standing aside.yet the world will burn, siuan, one way or another, whatever we
do. you could never see that . but we must now realize that our plans are precarious things. we have
even less control than we thought. perhaps only a fingernails grip. the winds of destiny are blowing,
siuan, and we must ride them where they take us.
the amyrlin shivered as if she felt those winds icy on the back of her neck. her hands went to the
flattened cube of gold, blunt, capable fingers finding precise points in the complex designs. cunningly
balanced, the top lifted back to reveal a curled, golden horn nestled within a space designed to hold it.
she lifted the instrument and traced the flowing silver script, in the old tongue, inlaid around the flaring
mouth.
the grave is no bar to my call, she translated, so softly she seemed to be speaking to herself. the
horn of valere, made to call dead heroes back from the grave. and prophecy said it would only be
found just in time for the last battle. abruptly she thrust the horn back into its niche and closed the lid
as if she could no longer bear the sight of it. agelmar pushed it into my hands as soon as the welcome
was done. he said he was afraid to go into his own strongroom any longer, with it there. the temptation
was too great, he said. to sound the horn himself and lead the host that answered its call north through
the blight to level shayol ghul itself and put an end to the dark one. he burned with the ecstasy of
glory, and it was that, he said, that told him it was not to be him, must not be him. he could not wait to
be rid of it, yet he wanted it still.
moiraine nodded. agelmar was familiar with the prophecy of the horn; most who fought the dark one
were. let whosoever sounds me think not of glory, but only of salvation. 
salvation. the amyrlin laughed bitterly. from the look in agelmars eyes, he didnt know whether he



was giving away salvation or rejecting the condemnation of his own soul. he only knew he had to be rid
of it before it burned him up. he has tried to keep it secret, but he says there are rumors in the keep
already. i do not feel his temptation, yet the horn still makes my skin crawl. he will have to take it back
into his strongroom until i leave. i could not sleep with it even in the next room. she rubbed frown lines
from her forehead and sighed. and it was not to be found until just before the last battle. can it be that
close? i thought, hoped, we would have more time.
the karaethon cycle.
yes, moiraine. you do not have to remind me. ive lived with the prophecies of the dragon as long as
you. the amyrlin shook her head. never more than one false dragon in a generation since the
breaking, and now three loose in the world at one time, and three more in the past two years. the
pattern demands a dragon because the pattern weaves toward tarmon gaidon. sometimes doubt fills
me, moiraine. she said it musingly, as if wondering at it, and went on in the same tone. what if logain
was the one? he could channel, before the reds brought him to the white tower, and we gentled him.
so can mazrim taim, the man in saldaea. what if it is him? there are sisters in saldaea already; he may
be taken by now. what if we have been wrong since the start? what happens if the dragon reborn is
gentled before the last battle even begins? even prophecy can fail if the one prophesied is slain or
gentled. and then we face the dark one naked to the storm.
neither of them is the one, siuan. the pattern does not demanda dragon, but the one true dragon.
until he proclaims himself, the pattern will continue to throw up false dragons, but after that there will be
no others. if logain or the other were the one, there would be no others.
for he shall come like the breaking dawn, and shatter the world again with his coming, and make it
anew. either we go naked in the storm, or cling to a protection that will scourge us. the light help us
all. the amyrlin shook herself as if to throw off her own words. her face was set, as though bracing for
a blow. you could never hide what you were thinking from me as you do from everyone else, moiraine.
you have more to tell me, and nothing good.
for answer moiraine took the leather pouch from her belt and upended it, spilling the contents on the
table. it appeared to be only a heap of fragmented pottery, shiny black and white.
the amyrlin seat touched one bit curiously, and her breath caught. cuendillar.
heartstone, moiraine agreed. the making ofcuendillar had been lost at the breaking of the world,
but what had been made of heartstone had survived the cataclysm. even those objects swallowed by the
earth or sunk in the sea had survived; they must have. no known force could breakcuendillar once it
was complete; even the one power directed against heartstone only made it stronger. except that some
powerhad broken this.
the amyrlin hastily assembled the pieces. what they formed was a disk the size of a mans hand, half
blacker than pitch and half whiter than snow, the colors meeting along a sinuous line, unfaded by age. the
ancient symbol of aes sedai, before the world was broken, when men and women wielded the power
together. half of it was now called the flame of tar valon; the other half was scrawled on doors, the
dragons fang, to accuse those within of evil. only seven like it had been made; everything ever made of
heartstone was recorded in the white tower, and those seven were remembered above all. siuan
sanche stared at it as she would have at a viper on her pillow.
one of the seals on the dark ones prison, she said finally, reluctantly. it was those seven seals over
which the amyrlin seat was supposed to be watcher. the secret hidden from the world, if the world



ever thought of it, was that no amyrlin seat had known where any of the seals were since the trolloc
wars.
we know the dark one is stirring, siuan. we know his prison cannot stay sealed forever. human work
can never match the creators. we knew he has touched the world again, even if, thank the light, only
indirectly. darkfriends multiply, and what we called evil but ten years ago seems almost caprice
compared with what now is done every day.
if the seals are already breaking . . . we may have no time at all.
little enough. but that little may be enough. it will have to be.
the amyrlin touched the fractured seal, and her voice grew tight, as if she were forcing herself to speak.
i saw the boy, you know, in the courtyard during the welcome. it is one of my talents, seeingtaveren .
a rare talent these days, even more rare thantaveren , and certainly not of much use. a tall boy, a fairly
handsome young man. not much different from any young man you might see in any town. she paused
to draw breath. moiraine, he blazed like the sun. ive seldom been afraid in my life, but the sight of him
made me afraid right down to my toes. i wanted to cower, to howl. i could barely speak. agelmar
thought i was angry with him, i said so little. that young man . . . hes the one we have sought these
twenty years.
there was a hint of question in her voice. moiraine answered it. he is.
are you certain? can he . . . ? can he . . . channel the one power?
her mouth strained around the words, and moiraine felt the tension, too, a twisting inside, a cold
clutching at her heart. she kept her face smooth, though. he can. a man wielding the one power. that
was a thing no aes sedai could contemplate without fear. it was a thing the whole world feared.and i
will loose it on the world . rand althor will stand before the world as the dragon reborn.
the amyrlin shuddered. rand althor. it does not sound like a name to inspire fear and set the world
on fire. she gave another shiver and rubbed her arms briskly, but her eyes suddenly shone with a
purposeful light. if he is the one, then we truly may have time enough. but is he safe here? i have two
red sisters with me, and i can no longer answer for green or yellow, either. the light consume me, i
cant answer for any of them, not with this. even verin and serafelle would leap on him the way they
would a scarlet adder in a nursery.
he is safe, for the moment.
the amyrlin waited for her to say more. the silence stretched, until it was plain she would not. finally
the amyrlin said, you say our old plan is useless. what do you suggest now?
i have purposely let him think i no longer have any interest in him, that he may go where he pleases for
all of me. she raised her hands as the amyrlin opened her mouth. it was necessary, siuan. rand
althor was raised in the two rivers, where manetherens stubborn blood flows in every vein, and his
own blood is like rock beside clay compared to manetherens. he must be handled gently, or he will bolt
in any direction but the one we want.
then well handle him like a newborn babe. well wrap him in swaddling clothes and play with his toes,
if thats what you think we need. but to what immediate purpose?



his two friends, matrim cauthon and perrin aybara, are ripe to see the world before they sink back
into the obscurity of the two rivers. if they can sink back; they aretaveren , too, if lesser than he. i will
induce them to carry the horn of valere to illian. she hesitated, frowning. there is . . . a problem with
mat. he carries a dagger from shadar logoth.
shadar logoth! light, why did you ever let them get near that place. every stone of it is tainted. there
isnt a pebble safe to carry away. light help us, if mordeth touched the boy . . . the amyrlin sounded as
though she were strangling. if that happened, the world would be doomed.
but it did not, siuan. we do what we must from necessity, and it was necessary. i have done enough so
that mat will not infect others, but he had the dagger too long before i knew. the link is still there. i had
thought i must take him to tar valon to cure it, but with so many sisters present, it might be done here.
so long as there are a few you can trust not to see darkfriends where there are none. you and i and two
others will suffice, using myangreal .
leane will do for one, and i can find another. suddenly the amyrlin seat gave a wry grin. the hall
wants thatangreal back, moiraine. there are not very many of them left, and you are now considered . .
. unreliable.
moiraine smiled, but it did not touch her eyes. they will think worse of me before i am done. mat will
leap at the chance to be so big a part of the legend of the horn, and perrin should not be hard to
convince. he needs something to take his mind off his own troubles. rand knows what he is  some of
it, at least; a little  and he is afraid of it, naturally. he wants to go off somewhere alone, where he
cannot hurt anyone. he says he will never wield the power again, but he fears not being able to stop it.
as well he might. easier to give up drinking water.
exactly. and he wants to be free from aes sedai. moiraine gave a small, mirthless smile. offered the
chance to leave aes sedai behind and still stay with his friends a while longer, he should be as eager as
mat.
but how is he leaving aes sedai behind? surely you must travel with him. we cant lose him now,
moiraine.
i cannot travel with him.it is a long way from fal dara to illian, but he has traveled almost as far
already . he must be let off the leash for a time. there is no help for it. i have had all of their old clothes
burned. there has been too much opportunity for some shred of what they were wearing to have fallen
into the wrong hands. i will cleanse them before they leave; they will not even realize it has been done.
there will be no chance they can be tracked that way, and the only other threat of that kind is locked
away here in the dungeon. the amyrlin, midway in nodding approval, gave her a questioning look, but
she did not pause. they will travel as safely as i can manage, siuan. and when rand needs me in illian,
i will be there, and i will see that it is he who presents the horn to the council of nine and the
assemblage. i will see to everything in illian. siuan, the illianers would follow the dragon, or baalzamon
himself, if he came bearing the horn of valere, and so will the greater part of those gathered for the hunt.
the true dragon reborn will not need to gather a following before nations move against him. he will
begin with a nation around him and an army at his back.
the amyrlin dropped back into her chair, but immediately leaned forward. she seemed caught between
weariness and hope. butwill he proclaim himself? if hes afraid . . . the light knows he should be,
moiraine, but men who name themselves as the dragonwant the power. if he does not. . .



i have the means to see him named dragon whether he wills it or not. and even if i somehow fail, the
pattern itself will see him named dragon whether he wills it or not. remember, he istaveren , siuan. he
has no more control over his fate than a candle wick has over the flame.
the amyrlin sighed. its risky, moiraine. risky. but my father used to say, girl, if you wont take a
chance, youll never win a copper. we have plans to make. sit down; this wont be done quickly. i will
send for wine and cheese.
moiraine shook her head. we have been closeted alone too long already. if any did try listening and
found your warding, they will be wondering already. it is not worth the risk. we can contrive another
meeting tomorrow.besides, my dearest friend, i cannot tell you everything, and i cannot risk
letting you know i am holding anything back .
i suppose you are right. but first thing in the morning. theres so much i have to know.
the morning, moiraine agreed. the amyrlin rose, and they hugged again. in the morning i will tell you
everything you need to know.
leane gave moiraine a sharp look when she came out into the anteroom, then darted into the amyrlins
chamber. moiraine tried to put on a chastened face, as if she had endured one of the amyrlins infamous
upbraidings  most women, however strongwilled, returned from those bigeyed and weakkneed 
but the expression was foreign to her. she looked more angry than anything else, which served much the
same purpose. she was only vaguely aware of the other women in the outer room; she thought some had
gone and others come since she went in, but she barely looked at them. the hour was growing late, and
there was much to be done before the morning came. much, before she spoke to the amyrlin seat again.
quickening her step, she moved deeper into the keep.

the column would have made an impressive sight under the waxing moon, moving through the tarabon
night to the jangle of harness, had there been anyone to see it. a full two thousand children of the light,
well mounted, in white tabards and cloaks, armor burnished, with their train of supply wagons, and
farriers, and grooms with the strings of remounts. there were villages in this sparsely forested country,
but they had left roads behind, and stayed clear of even farmers crofts. they were to meet . . . someone
. . . at a flyspeck village near the northern border of tarabon, at the edge of almoth plain.
geofram bornhald, riding at the head of his men, wondered what it was all about. he remembered too
well his interview with pedron niall, lord captain commander of the children of the light, in amador,
but he had learned little there.
we are alone, geofram, the whitehaired man had said. his voice was thin and reedy with age.
i remember giving you the oath . . . what . . . thirtysix years ago, it must be, now.
bornhald straightened. my lord captain commander, may i ask why i was called back from
caemlyn, and with such urgency? a push, and morgase could be toppled. there are houses in
andor that see dealing with tar valon as we do, and they were ready to lay claim to the throne. i
left eamon valda in charge, but he seemed intent on following the daughterheir to tar valon. i
would not be surprised to learn the man has kidnapped the girl, or even attacked tar valon. 
and dain, bornhalds son, had arrived just before bornhald was recalled. dain was full of zeal.
too much zeal, sometimes. enough to fall in blindly with whatever valda proposed.



valda walks in the light, geofram. but you are the best battle commander among the children.
you will assemble a full legion, the best men you can find, and take them into tarabon, avoiding
any eyes attached to a tongue that may speak. any such tongue must be silenced, if the eyes see.
bornhald hesitated. fifty children together, or even a hundred, could enter any land without
question, at least without open question, but an entire legion . . . is it war, my lord captain
commander? there is talk in the streets. wild rumors, mainly, about artur hawkwings armies
come back. the old man did not speak. the king. . .
does not command the children, lord captain bornhald. for the first time there was a snap
in the lord captain commanders voice. i do. let the king sit in his palace and do what he does
best. nothing. you will be met at a village called alcruna, and there you will receive your final
orders. i expect your legion to ride in three days. now go, geofram. you have work to do.
bornhald frowned. pardon, my lord captain commander, but who will meet me? why am i
risking war with tarabon?
you will be told what you must know when you reach alcruna. the lord captain commander
suddenly looked more than his age. absently he plucked at his white tunic, with the golden
sunburst of the children large on the chest. there are forces at work beyond what you know,
geofram. beyond what even youcanknow. choose your men quickly. now go. ask me no more.
and the light ride with you.
now bornhald straightened in his saddle, working a knot out of his back.i am getting old , he thought.
a day and a night in the saddle, with two pauses to water the horses, and he felt every gray hair on his
head. he would not even have noticed a few years ago.at least i have not killed any innocents . he
could be as hard on darkfriends as any man sworn to the light  darkfriends must be destroyed before
they pulled the whole world under the shadow  but he wanted to be sure theywere darkfriends first. it
had been difficult avoiding taraboner eyes with so many men, even in the backcountry, but he had
managed it. no tongues had needed to be silenced.
the scouts he had sent out came riding back, and behind them came more men in white cloaks, some
carrying torches to ruin the night vision of everyone at the head of the column. with a muttered curse,
bornhald ordered a halt while he studied those who came to meet him.
their cloaks bore the same golden sunburst on the breast as his, the same as every child of the light,
and their leader even had golden knots of rank below it equivalent to bornhalds. but behind their
sunbursts were red shepherds crooks. questioners. with hot irons and pinchers and dripping water the
questioners pulled confession and repentance from darkfriends, but there were those who said they
decided guilt before ever they began. geofram bornhald was one who said it.
i have been sent here to meetquestioners?
we have been waiting for you, lord captain bornhald, the leader said in a harsh voice. he was a tall,
hooknosed man with the gleam of certainty in his eyes that every questioner had. you could have
made better time. i am einor saren, second to jaichim carridin, who commands the hand of the light in
tarabon. the hand of the light  the hand that dug out truth, so they said. they did not like the name
questioners. there is a bridge at the village. have your men move across. we will talk in the inn. it is
surprisingly comfortable.



i was told by the lord captain commander himself to avoid all eyes.
the village has been . . . pacified. now move your men.i command, now. i have orders with the lord
captain commanders seal, if you doubt.
bornhald suppressed the growl that rose in his throat. pacified. he wondered if the bodies had been
piled outside the village, or if they had been thrown into the river. it would be like the questioners, cold
enough to kill an entire village for secrecy and stupid enough to throw the bodies into the river to float
downstream and trumpet their deed from alcruna to tanchico. what i doubt is why i am in tarabon
with two thousand men, questioner.
sarens face tightened, but his voice remained harsh and demanding. it is simple, lord captain. there
are towns and villages across almoth plain with none in authority above a mayor or a town council. it is
past time they were brought to the light. there will be many darkfriends in such places.
bornhalds horse stamped. are you saying, saren, that ive brought an entire legion across most of
tarabon in secrecy to root a few darkfriends out of some grubby villages?
you are here to do as you are told, bornhald. to do the work of the light! or are you sliding from the
light? sarens smile was a grimace. if battle is what you seek, you may have your chance. the
strangers have a great force on toman head, more than tarabon and arad doman together may be able
to hold, even if they can stop their own bickering long enough to work together. if the strangers break
through, you will have all the fighting you can handle. the taraboners claim the strangers are monsters,
creatures of the dark one. some say they have aes sedai to fight for them. if theyare darkfriends,
these strangers, they will have to be dealt with, too. in their turn.
for a moment, bornhald stopped breathing. then the rumors are true. artur hawkings armies have
returned.
strangers, saren said flatly. he sounded as if he regretted having mentioned them. strangers, and
probably darkfriends, from wherever they came. that is all we know, and all you need to know. they
do not concern you now. we are wasting time. move your men across the river, bornhald. i will give
you your orders in the village. he whirled his horse and galloped back the way he had come, his
torchbearers riding at his heels.
bornhald closed his eyes to hasten the return of his night sight.we are being used like stones on a
board . byar! he opened his eyes as his second appeared at his side, stiffening in his saddle before the
lord captain. the gauntfaced man had almost the questioners light in his eyes, but he was a good
soldier despite. there is a bridge ahead. move the legion across the river and make camp. i will join you
as soon as i can.
he gathered his reins and rode in the direction the questioner had taken.stones on a board. but who is
moving us? and why?

afternoon shadows gave way to evening as liandrin made her way through the womens apartments.
beyond the arrowslits, darkness grew and pressed on the light from the lamps in the corridor. twilight
was a troubled time for liandrin of late, that and dawn. at dawn the day was born, just as twilight gave
birth to night, but at dawn, night died, and at twilight, day. the dark ones power was rooted in death;
he gained power from death, and at those times she thought she could feel his power stirring. something



stirred in the half dark, at least. something she almost thought she could catch if she turned quickly
enough, something she was sure she could see if she looked hard enough.
serving women in blackandgold curtsied as she passed, but she did not respond. she kept her eyes
fixed straight ahead, and did not see them.
at the door she sought, she paused for a quick glance up and down the hall. the only women in sight
were servants; there were no men, of course. she pushed open the door and went in without knocking.
the outer room of the lady amalisas chambers was brightly lit, and a blazing fire on the hearth held
back the chill of the shienaran night. amalisa and her ladies sat about the room, in chairs and on the
layered carpets, listening while one of their number, standing, read aloud to them. it wasthe dance of
the hawk and the hummingbird , by teven aerwin, which purported to set forth the proper conduct
of men toward women and women toward men. liandrins mouth tightened; she certainly had not read it,
but she had heard as much as she needed about it. amalisa and her ladies greeted each pronouncement
with gales of laughter, falling against each other and drumming their heels on the carpets like girls.
the reader was the first to become aware of liandrins presence. she cut off with a surprised widening
of her eyes. the others turned to see what she was staring at, and silence replaced laughter. all but
amalisa scrambled to their feet, hastily smoothing hair and skirts.
the lady amalisa rose gracefully, with a smile. you honor us with your presence, liandrin. this is a
most pleasant surprise. i did not expect you until tomorrow. i thought you would want to rest after your
long jour  
liandrin cut her off sharply, addressing the air. i will speak to the lady amalisa alone. all of you will
leave. now.
there was a moment of shocked silence, then the other women made their goodbyes to amalisa. one
by one they curtsied to liandrin, but she did not acknowledge them. she continued to stare straight
ahead at nothing, but she saw them, and heard. honorifics offered with breathy unease at the aes sedais
mood. eyes falling when she ignored them. they squeezed past her to the door, pressing back
awkwardly so their skirts did not disturb hers.
as the door closed behind the last of them, amalisa said, liandrin, i do not underst  
do you walk in the light, my daughter? there would be none of that foolishness of calling her sister
here. the other woman was older by some years, but the ancient forms would be observed. however
long they had been forgotten, it was time they were remembered.
as soon as the question was out of her mouth, though, liandrin realized she had made a mistake. it was
a question guaranteed to cause doubt and anxiety, coming from an aes sedai, but amalisas back
stiffened, and her face hardened.
that is an insult, liandrin sedai. i am shienaran, of a noble house and the blood of soldiers. my line
has fought the shadow since before therewas a shienar, three thousand years without fail or a days
weakness.
liandrin shifted her point of attack, but she did not retreat. striding across the room, she took the
leatherbound copy ofthe dance of the hawk and the hummingbird from the mantelpiece and hefted
it without looking at it. in shienar above other lands, my daughter, the light must be precious, and the



shadow feared. casually she threw the book into the fire. flames leaped as if it were a log of fatwood,
thundering as they licked up the chimney. in the same instant every lamp in the room flared, hissing, so
fiercely did they burn, flooding the chamber with light. here above all. here, so close to the cursed
blight, where corruption waits. here, even one who thinks he walks in the light may still be corrupted by
the shadow.
beads of sweat glistened on amalisas forehead. the hand she had raised in protest for her book fell
slowly to her side. her features still held firm, but liandrin saw her swallow, and her feet shift. i do not
understand, liandrin sedai. is it the book? it is only foolishness.
there was a faint quaver in her voice.good . glass lamp mantles cracked as the flames leaped higher
and hotter, lighting the room as bright as unsheltered noon. amalisa stood as stiff as a post, her face tight
as she tried not to squint.
it is you who are foolish, my daughter. i care nothing for books. here, men enter the blight, and walk in
its taint. in the very shadow. why wonder you that that taint may seep into them? whether or not against
their will, still it may seep. why think you the amyrlin seat herself has come?
no. it was a gasp.
of the red am i, my daughter, liandrin said relentlessly. i hunt all men corrupted.
i dont understand.
not only those foul ones who try the one power. all men corrupted. high and low do i hunt.
i dont . . . amalisa licked her lips unsteadily and made a visible fort to gather herself. i do not
understand, liandrin sedai. please . . .
high even before low.
no! as if some invisible support had vanished, amalisa fell to her knees, and her head dropped.
please, liandrin sedai, say you do not mean agelmar. it cannot be him.
in that moment of doubt and confusion, liandrin struck. she did not move, but lashed out with the one
power. amalisa gasped and gave a jerk, as if she had been pricked with a needle, and liandrins petulant
mouth perked in a smile.
this was her own special trick from childhood, the first learned of her abilities. it had been forbidden to
her as soon as the mistress of novices discovered it, but to liandrin that only meant one more thing she
needed to conceal from those who were jealous of her.
she strode forward and pulled amalisas chin up. the metal that had stiffened her was still there, but it
was baser metal now, malleable to the right pressures. tears trickled from the corners of amalisas eyes,
glistening on her cheeks. liandrin let the fires die back to normal; there was no longer any need for such.
she softened her words, but her voice was as unyielding as steel.
daughter, no one wants to see you and agelmar thrown to the people as darkfriends. i will help you,
but you must help.
hhelp you? amalisa put her hands to her temples; she looked confused. please, liandrin sedai, i



dont . . . understand. it is all so. . . its all. . .
it was not a perfect ability; liandrin could not force anyone to do what she wanted  though she had
tried; oh, how she had tried. but she could open them wide to her arguments, make them want to believe
her, want more than anything to be convinced of her rightness.
obey, daughter. obey, and answer my questions truthfully, and i promise that no one will speak of you
and agelmar as darkfriends. you will not be dragged naked through the streets, to be flogged from the
city if the people do not tear you to pieces first. i will not let this happen. you understand?
yes, liandrin sedai, yes. i will do as you say and answer you truly.
liandrin straightened, looking down at the other woman. the lady amalisa stayed as she was, kneeling,
her face as open as a childs, a child waiting to be comforted and helped by someone wiser and stronger.
there was a rightness about it to liandrin. she had never understood why a simple bow or curtsy was
sufficient for aes sedai when men and women knelt to kings and queens.what queen has within her
my power? her mouth twisted angrily, and amalisa shivered.
be easy in yourself, my daughter. i have come to help you, not to punish. only those who deserve it will
be punished. truth only, speak to me.
i will, liandrin sedai. i will, i swear it by my house and honor.
moiraine came to fal dara with a darkfriend.
amalisa was too frightened to show surprise. oh, no, liandrin sedai. no. that man came later. he is in
the dungeons now.
later, you say. but it is true that she speaks often with him? she is often in company with this
darkfriend? alone?
ssometimes, liandrin sedai. only sometimes. she wishes to find out why he came here. moiraine
sedai is   liandrin held up her hand sharply, and amalisa swallowed whatever else she had been
going to say.
by three young men moiraine was accompanied. this iknow . where are they? i have been to their
rooms, and they are not to be found.
i  i do not know, liandrin sedai. they seem nice boys. surely you dont think they are darkfriends.
not darkfriends, no. worse. by far more dangerous than darkfriends, my daughter. the entire world
is in danger from them. they must be found. you will command your servants to search the keep, and
your ladies, and yourself. every crack and cranny. to this, you will see personally. personally! and to no
one will you speak of it, save those i name. none else may know. none. from fal dara in secrecy these
young men must be removed, and to tar valon taken. in utter secrecy.
as you command, liandrin sedai. but i do not understand the need for secrecy. no one here will
hinder aes sedai.
of the black ajah you have heard?



amalisas eyes bulged, and she leaned back away from liandrin, raising her hands as though to shield
herself from a blow. a vvile rumor, liandrin sedai. vvile. there are nno aes sedai who sserve the
dark one. i do not believe it. you must believe me! under the light, i sswear i do not believe it. by
my honor and my house, i swear . . .
coolly liandrin let her go on, watching the last remaining strength leach out of the other woman with her
own silence. aes sedai had been known to become angry, very angry, with those who even mentioned
the black ajah much less those who said they believed in its hidden existence. after this, with her will
already weakened by that little childhood trick, amalisa would be as clay in her hands. after one more
blow.
the black ajah isreal , child. real, and here within fal daras walls. amalisa knelt there, her mouth
hanging open. the black ajah. aes sedai who were also darkfriends. almost as horrible to learn the
dark one himself walked fal dara keep. but liandrin would not let up now. any aes sedai in the halls
you pass, a black sister could be. this i swear. i cannot tell you which they are, but my protection you
can have. if in the light you walk and me obey.
i will, amalisa whispered hoarsely. i will. please, liandrin sedai, please say you will protect my
brother, and my ladies . . .
who deserves protection i will protect. concern yourself with yourself, my daughter. and think only of
what i have commanded of you. only that. the fate of the world rides on this, my daughter. all else you
must forget.
yes, liandrin sedai. yes. yes.
liandrin turned and crossed the room, not looking back until she reached the door. amalisa was still on
her knees, still watching her anxiously. rise, my lady amalisa. liandrin made her voice pleasant, with
only a hint of the mocking she felt.sister, indeed! not one day as a novice would she last. and power
to command shehas . rise. amalisa straightened in slow, stiff jerks, as if she had been bound hand and
foot for hours. as she finally came upright, liandrin said, the steel back in full strength, and if you fail the
world, if you fail me, that wretched darkfriend in the dungeon will be your envy.
from the look on amalisas face, liandrin did not think failure would come from any lack of effort on
her part.
pulling the door shut behind her, liandrin suddenly felt a prickling across her skin. breath catching, she
whirled about, looking up and down the dimly lit hall. empty. it was full night beyond the arrowslits. the
hall was empty, yet she was sure there had been eyes on her. the vacant corridor, shadowy between the
lamps on the walls, mocked her. she shrugged uneasily, then started down the hall determinedly.fancies
take me. nothing more .
full night already, and there was much to do before dawn. her orders had been explicit.

pitchblackness covered the dungeons whatever the hour, unless someone brought in a lantern, but
padan fain sat on the edge of his cot, staring into the dark with a smile on his face. he could hear the
other two prisoners grumbling in their sleep, muttering in nightmares. padan fain was waiting for
something, something he had been awaiting for a long time. for too long. but not much longer.



the door to the outer guardroom opened, spilling in a flood of light, darkly outlining a figure in the
doorway.
fain stood. you! not who i expected. he stretched with a casualness he did not feel. blood raced
through his veins; he thought he could leap over the keep if he tried. surprises for everyone, eh? well,
come on. the nights getting old, and i want some sleep sometime.
as a lamp came into the cell chamber, fain raised his head, grinning at something, unseen yet felt,
beyond the dungeons stone ceiling. it isnt over yet, he whispered.
the battles never over.

chapter 6

dark prophecy

the farmhouse door shook under furious blows from outside; the heavy bar across the door jumped in
its brackets. beyond the window next to the door moved the heavymuzzled silhouette of a trolloc.
there were windows everywhere, and more shadowy shapes outside. not shadowy enough, though.
rand could still make them out.
the windows, he thought desperately. he backed away from the door, clutching his sword before him
in both hands.even if the door holds, they can break in the windows. why arent they trying the
windows?
with a deafening metallic screech, one of the brackets pulled partly away from the doorframe, hanging
loose on nails ripped a fingers width out of the wood. the bar quivered from another blow, and the nails
squealed again.
we have to stop them! rand shouted.only we cant. we cant stop them . he looked around for a
way to run, but there was only the one door. the room was a box. only one door, and so many
windows. we have to do something. something!
its too late, mat said. dont you understand? his grin looked odd on a bloodless pale face, and the
hilt of a dagger stood out from his chest, the ruby that capped it blazing as if it held fire. the gem had
more life than his face. its too late for us to change anything.
ive finally gotten rid of them, perrin said, laughing. blood streamed down his face like a flood of tears
from his empty sockets. he held out red hands, trying to make rand look at what he held. im free,



now. its over.
its never over, althor, padan fain cried, capering in the middle of the floor. the battles never
done.
the door exploded in splinters, and rand ducked away from the flying shards of wood. two redclad
aes sedai stepped through, bowing their master in. a mask the color of dried blood covered
baalzamons face, but rand could see the flames of his eyes through the eyeslits; he could hear the
roaring fires of baalzamons mouth.
it is not yet done between us, althor, baalzamon said, and he and fain spoke together as one, for
you, the battle is never done.
with a strangled gasp rand sat up on the floor, clawing his way awake. it seemed he could still hear
fains voice, as sharp as if the peddler were standing beside him.its never over. the battles never
done.
blearyeyed, he looked around to convince himself that he was still hidden away where egwene had left
him, bedded down on a pallet in a corner of her room. the dim light of a single lamp suffused the room,
and he was surprised to see nynaeve, knitting in a rocking chair on the other side of the lone bed, its
covers still in place. it was night outside.
darkeyed and slender, nynaeve wore her hair in a fat braid, pulled over one shoulder and hanging
almost to her waist. she had not given up on home. her face was calm, and she seemed aware of nothing
except her knitting as she rocked gently. the steadyclickclick of her knitting needles was the only
sound. the rug silenced the rocking chair.
there had been nights of late when he had wished for a carpet on the cold stone floor of his room, but in
shienar mens rooms were always bare and stark. the walls here had two tapestries, mountain scenes
with waterfalls, and flowerembroidered curtains alongside the arrowslits. cut flowers, white
morningstars, stood in a flat, round vase on the table by the bed, and more nodded in glazed white
sconces on the walls. a tall mirror stood in a corner, and another hung over the washstand, with its
bluestriped pitcher and bowl. he wondered why egwene needed two mirrors; there was none in his
room, and he did not miss it. there was only one lamp lit, but four more stood around the room, which
was nearly as large as the one he shared with mat and perrin. egwene had it alone.
without looking up, nynaeve said, if you sleep in the afternoon, you cant expect to sleep at night.
he frowned, though she could not see it. at least, he thought she could not. she was only a few years
older than he, but being wisdom added fifty years of authority. i needed a place to hide, and i was
tired, he said, then quickly added, i didnt just come here. egwene invited me into the womens
apartments.
nynaeve lowered her knitting and gave him an amused smile. she was a pretty woman. that was
something he would never have noticed back home; one just did not think of a wisdom that way. the
light help me, rand, you are becoming more shienaran every day. invited into the womens apartments,
indeed. she sniffed. any day now, youll start talking about your honor, and asking peace to favor your
sword. he colored, and hoped she did not notice in the dim light. she eyed his sword, its hilt sticking
out of the long bundle beside him on the floor. he knew she did not approve of the sword, of any sword,
but she said nothing about it for once. egwene told me why you need a place to hide. dont worry. we
will keep you hidden from the amyrlin, or from any other aes sedai, if that is what you want.



she met his eyes and jerked hers away, but not before he saw her uneasiness. her doubt.thats right, i
can channel the power. a man wielding the one power! you ought to be helping the aes sedai
hunt me down and gentle me.
scowling, he straightened the leather jerkin egwene had found for him and twisted around so he could
lean back against the wall. as soon as i can, i will hide in a cart, or sneak out. you wont have to hide
me long. nynaeve did not say anything; she fixed on her knitting, making an angry sound when she
dropped a stitch. where is egwene?
she let the knitting fall onto her lap. i dont know why i am even trying tonight. i cant keep track of my
stitches for some reason. she has gone down to see padan fain. she thinks seeing faces he knows might
help him.
mine certainly did not. she ought to stay away from him. hes dangerous.
she wants to help him, nynaeve said calmly. remember, she was training to be my assistant, and
being a wisdom is not all predicting the weather. healing is part of it, too. egwene has the desire to heal,
the need to. and if padan fain is so dangerous, moiraine would have said something  
he barked a laugh. you didnt ask her. egwene admitted it, and i can just see you asking permission
for anything. her raised eyebrow wiped the laugh off his face. he refused to apologize, though. they
were a long way from home, and he did not see how she could go on being wisdom of emonds field if
she was going to tar valon. have they started to search for me, yet? egwene is not sure they will, but
lan says the amyrlin seat is here because of me, and i think ill take his opinion over hers.
for a moment nynaeve did not answer. instead she fussed with her skeins of yarn. finally she said, i
am not sure. one of the serving women came a little while ago. to turn down the bed, she said. as if
egwene would be going to sleep already, with the feast for the amyrlin tonight. i sent her away; she
didnt see you.
nobody turns your bed down for you in the mens quarters. she gave him a level look, one that would
have set him stammering a year ago. he shook his head. they wouldnt use the maids to look for me,
nynaeve.
when i went to the buttery for a cup of milk earlier, there were too many women in the halls. those
who are attending the feast should have been getting dressed, and the others should either have been
helping them or getting ready to serve, or to . . .  she frowned worriedly. theres more than enough
work for everybody with the amyrlin here. and they were not just here in the womens apartments. i
saw the lady amalisa herself coming out of a storeroom near the buttery with her face all over dust.
thats ridiculous. why would she be part of a search? or any of the women, for that matter. theyd be
using lord agelmars soldiers, and the warders. and the aes sedai. they must just be doing something
for the feast. burn me if i know what a shienaran feast takes.
you are a woolhead, sometimes, rand. the men i saw didnt know what the women were doing
either. i heard some of them complaining about having to do all the work by themselves. i know it makes
no sense that they were looking for you. none of the aes sedai seemed to be taking any interest. but
amalisa was not readying herself for the feast by dirtying her dress in a storeroom. they were looking for
something, something important. even if she began right after i saw her, she would barely have time to
bathe and change. speaking of which, if egwene doesnt come back soon, shell have to choose



between changing and being late.
for the first time, he realized that nynaeve was not wearing the two rivers woolens he was used to.
her dress was pale blue silk, embroidered in snowdrop blossoms around the neck and down the sleeves.
each blossom centered on a small pearl, and her belt was tooled in silver, with a silver buckle set with
pearls. he had never seen her in anything like that. even feastday clothes back home might not match it.
youre going to the feast?
of course. even if moiraine had not said i should, i would never let her think i was . . . her eyes lit up
fiercely for a moment, and he knew what she meant. nynaeve would never let anyone think she was
afraid, even if she was. certainly not moiraine, and especially not lan. he hoped she did not know he
was aware of her feelings for the warder.
after a moment her gaze softened as it fell on the sleeve of her dress. the lady amalisa gave me this,
she said so softly he wondered if she was speaking to herself. she stroked the silk with her fingers,
outlining the embroidered flowers, smiling, lost in thought.
its very pretty on you, nynaeve. youre pretty tonight. he winced as soon as he said it. any wisdom
was touchy about her authority, but nynaeve was touchier than most. the womens circle back home
had always looked over her shoulder because she was young, and maybe because she was pretty, and
her fights with the mayor and the village council had been the stuff of stories.
she jerked her hand away from the embroidery and glared at him, brows lowering. he spoke quickly to
forestall her.
they cant keep the gates barred forever. once they are opened, i will be gone, and the aes sedai will
never find me. perrin says there are places in the black hills and the caralain grass you can go for days
without seeing a soul. maybemaybe i can figure out what to do about . . .  he shrugged
uncomfortably. there was no need to say it, not to her. and if i cant, therell be no one to hurt.
nynaeve was silent for a moment, then she said slowly, i am not so sure, rand. i cant say you look
like more than another village boy to me, but moiraine insists you aretaveren , and i dont think she
believes the wheel is finished with you. the dark one seems  
shaitan is dead, he said harshly, and abruptly the room seemed to lurch. he grabbed his head as
waves of dizziness sloshed through him.
you fool! you pure, blind, idiotic fool! naming the dark one, bringing his attention down on you!
dont you have enough trouble?
hes dead, rand muttered, rubbing his head. he swallowed. the dizziness was already fading. all
right, all right. baalzamon, if you want. but hes dead; i saw him die, saw him burn.
and i wasnt watching you when the dark ones eye fell on you just now? dont tell me you felt
nothing, or ill box your ears; i saw your face.
hes dead, rand insisted. the unseen watcher flashed through his head, and the wind on the tower
top. he shivered. strange things happen this close to the blight.
youare a fool, rand althor. she shook a fist at him. iwould box your ears for you if i thought it



would knock any sense  
the rest of her words were swallowed as bells crashed out ringing all over the keep.
he bounded to his feet. thats an alarm! theyre searching . . . name the dark one, and his evil
comes down on you.
nynaeve stood more slowly, shaking her head uneasily. no, i dont think so. if they are searching for
you, all the bells do is warn you. no, if its an alarm, it is not for you.
then what? he hurried to the nearest arrowslit and peered out.
lights darted through the nightcloaked keep like fireflies, lamps and torches dashing here and there.
some went to the outer walls and towers, but most of those that he could see milled through the garden
below and the one courtyard he could just glimpse part of. whatever had caused the alarm was inside
the keep. the bells fell silent, unmasking the shouts of men, but he could not make out what they were
calling.
if it isnt for me. . .egwene, he said suddenly.if shes still alive, if theres any evil, its supposed to
come to me.
nynaeve turned from looking through another arrowslit. what?
egwene. he crossed the room in quick strides and snatched his sword and scabbard free of the
bundle.light, its supposed to hurt me, not her . shes in the dungeon with fain. what if hes loose
somehow?
she caught him at the door, grabbing his arm. she was not as tall as his shoulder, but she held on like
iron. dont be a worse goatbrained fool than youve already been, rand althor. even if this doesnt
have anything to do with you, the women are looking for something! light, man, this is the womens
apartments. there will be aes sedai out there in the halls, likely as not. egwene will be all right. she was
going to take mat and perrin with her. even if she met trouble, they would look after her.
what if she couldnt find them, nynaeve? egwene would never let that stop her. she would go alone,
the same as you, and you know it. light, i told her fain is dangerous! burn me, i told her! pulling free,
he jerked open the door and dashed out.light burn me, its supposed to hurt me!
a woman screamed at the sight of him, in a laborers coarse shirt and jerkin with a sword in his hand.
even invited, men did not go armed in the womens apartments unless the keep was under attack.
women filled the corridor, serving women in the blackandgold, ladies of the keep in silks and laces,
women in embroidered shawls with long fringes, all talking loudly at the same time, all demanding to
know what was happening. crying children clung to skirts everywhere. he plunged through them,
dodging where he could, muttering apologies to those he shouldered aside, trying to ignore their startled
stares.
one of the women in a shawl turned to go back into her room, and he saw the back of her shawl, saw
the gleaming white teardrop in the middle of her back. suddenly he recognized faces he had seen in the
outer courtyard. aes sedai, staring at him in alarm, now.
who are you? what are you doing here?



is the keep under attack? answer me, man!
hes no soldier. who is he? whats happening?
its the young southland lord!
someone stop him!
fear pushed his lips back, baring his teeth, but he kept moving, and tried to move faster.
then a woman came out into the hall, facetoface with him, and he stopped in spite of himself. he
recognized that face above the rest; he thought he would remember it if he lived forever. the amyrlin
seat. her eyes widened at the sight of him, and she started back. another aes sedai, the tall woman he
had seen with the staff, put herself between him and the amyrlin, shouting something at him that he could
not make out over the increasing babble.
she knows. light help me, she knows. moiraine told her. snarling, he ran on.light, just let me
make sure egwenes safe before they . . . he heard shouting behind him, but he did not listen.
there was enough turmoil around him out in the keep. men running for the courtyards with swords in
hand, never looking at him. over the clamor of alarm bells, he could make out other noises, now. shouts.
screams. metal ringing on metal. he had just time to realize they were the sounds of battle fighting?
inside fal dara?  when three trollocs came dashing around a corner in front of him.
hairy snouts distorted otherwise human faces, and one of them had rams horns. they bared teeth,
raising scythelike swords as they sped toward him.
the hallway that had been full of running men a moment before was empty now except for the three
trollocs and himself. caught by surprise, he unsheathed his sword awkwardly, tried hummingbird kisses
the honeyrose. shaken at finding trollocs in the heart of fal dara keep, he did the form so badly lan
would have stalked off in disgust. a bearsnouted trolloc evaded it easily, bumping the other two off
stride for just an instant.
suddenly there were a dozen shienarans rushing past him at the trollocs, men half dressed in finery for
the feast, but swords at the ready. the bearsnouted trolloc snarled as it died, and its companions ran,
pursued by shouting men waving steel. shouts and screams filled the air from everywhere.
egwene!
rand turned deeper into the keep, running down halls empty of life, though now and again a dead
trolloc lay on the floor. or a dead man.
then he came to a crossing of corridors, and to his left was the tail end of a fight. six topknotted men
lay bleeding and still, and a seventh was dying. the myrddraal gave its sword an extra twist as it pulled
the blade free of the mans belly, and the soldier screamed as he dropped his sword and fell. the fade
moved with viperous grace, the serpent illusion heightened by the armor of black, overlapping plates that
covered its chest. it turned, and that pale, eyeless face studied rand. it started toward him, smiling a
bloodless smile, not hurrying. it had no need to hurry for one man alone.
he felt rooted where he stood; his tongue stuck to the roof of his mouth. the look of the eyeless is fear.
that was what they said along the border. his hands shook as he raised his sword. he never even



thought of assuming the void.light, it just killed seven armed soldiers together. light, what am i
going to do! light!
abruptly the myrddraal stopped, its smile gone.
this one is mine, rand. rand gave a start as ingtar stepped up beside him, dark and stocky in a
yellow feastday coat, sword held in both hands. ingtars dark eyes never left the fades face; if the
shienaran felt the fear of that gaze, he gave no sign. try yourself on a trolloc or two, he said softly,
before you face one of these.
i was coming down to see if egwene is safe. she was going to the dungeon to visit fain, and  
then go see to her.
rand swallowed. well take it together, ingtar.
you arent ready for this. go see to your girl. go! you want trollocs to find her unprotected?
for a moment rand hung there, undecided. the fade had raised its sword, for ingtar. a silent snarl
twisted ingtars mouth, but rand knew it was not fear. and egwene could be alone in the dungeon with
fain, or worse. still he felt ashamed as he ran for the stairs that led underground. he knew a fades look
could make any man afraid, but ingtar had conquered the dread. his stomach still felt knotted.
the corridors beneath the keep were silent, and feebly lit by flickering, farspaced lamps on the walls.
he slowed as he came closer to the dungeons, creeping as silently as he could on his toes. the grate of
his boots on the bare stone seemed to fill his ears. the door to the dungeons stood cracked open a
handbreadth. it should have been closed and bolted.
staring at the door, he tried to swallow and could not. he opened his mouth to call out, then shut it again
quickly. if egwene was in there and in trouble, shouting would only warn whoever was endangering her.
or whatever. taking a deep breath, he set himself.
in one motion he pushed the door wide open with the scabbard in his left hand and threw himself into the
dungeon, tucking his shoulder under to roll through the straw covering the floor and come to his feet,
spinning this way and that too quickly to get a clear picture of the room, looking desperately for anyone
who might attack him, looking for egwene. there was no one there.
his eyes fell on the table, and he stopped dead, breath and even thought freezing. on either side of the
stillburning lamp, as if to make a centerpiece, sat the heads of the guards in two pools of blood. their
eyes stared at him, wide with fear, and their mouths gaped in a last scream no one could hear. rand
gagged and doubled over; his stomach heaved again and again as he vomited into the straw. finally he
managed to pull himself erect, scrubbing his mouth with his sleeve; his throat felt scraped raw.
slowly he became aware of the rest of the room, only half seen and not taken in during his hasty search
for an attacker. bloody lumps of flesh lay scattered through the straw. there was nothing he could
recognize as human except the two heads. some of the pieces looked chewed.so thats what
happened to the rest of their bodies . he was surprised at the calmness of his thoughts, almost as if he
had achieved the void without trying. it was the shock, he knew vaguely.
he did not recognize either of the heads; the guards had been changed since he was there earlier. he
was glad for that. knowing who they were, even changu, would have made it worse. blood covered the



walls, too, but in scrawled letters, single words and whole sentences splashed on every which way. some
were harsh and angular, in a language he did not know, though he recognized trolloc script. others he
could read, and wished he could not. blasphemies and obscenities bad enough to make a stablehand or a
merchants guard go pale.
egwene. calmness vanished. shoving his scabbard through his belt, he snatched the lamp from the
table, hardly noticing when the heads toppled over. egwene! where are you?
he started toward the inner door, took two steps, and stopped, staring. the words on the door, dark
and glistening wetly in the light of his lamp, were plain enough.
we will meet again on toman head.
it is never over, althor.
his sword dropped from a hand suddenly numb. never taking his eyes off the door, he bent to pick it
up. instead he grabbed a handful of straw and began scrubbing furiously at the words on the door.
panting, he scrubbed until it was all one bloody smear, but he could not stop.
what do you do?
at the sharp voice behind him, he whirled, stooping to seize his sword.
a woman stood in the outer doorway, back stiff with outrage. her hair was like pale gold, in a dozen or
more braids, but her eyes were dark, and sharp on his face. she looked not much older than he, and
pretty in a sulky way, but there was a tightness to her mouth he did not like. then he saw the shawl she
had wrapped tightly around her, with its long, red fringe.
aes sedai. and light help me, shes red ajah. i . . . i was just . . . its filthy stuff. vile.
everything must be left exactly as it is for us to examine. touch nothing. she took a step forward,
peering at him, and he took one back. yes. yes, as i thought. one of those with moiraine. what do
you have to do with this? her gesture took in the heads on the table and the bloody scrawl on the walls.
for a minute he goggled at her. me? nothing! i came down here to find . . . egwene!
he turned to open the inner door, and the aes sedai shouted, no! you will answer me!
suddenly it was all he could do to stand up, to keep holding the lamp and his sword. icy cold squeezed
at him from all sides. his head felt caught in a frozen vise; he could barely breathe for the pressure on his
chest.
answer me, boy. tell me your name.
involuntarily he grunted, trying to answer against the chill that seemed to be pressing his face back into
his skull, constricting his chest like frozen iron bands. he clenched his jaws to keep the sound in. painfully
he rolled his eyes to glare at her through a blur of tears.the light burn you, aes sedai! i wont say a
word, the shadow take you!
answer me, boy! now!
frozen needles pierced his brain with agony, grated into his bones. the void formed inside him before he



even realized he had thought of it, but it could not hold out the pain. dimly he sensed light and warmth
somewhere in the distance. it flickered queasily, but the light was warm, and he was cold. distant beyond
knowing, but somehow just within reach.light, so cold. i have to reach . . .what? shes killing me. i
have to reach it, or shell kill me . desperately he stretched toward the light.
what is going on here?
abruptly the cold and the pressure and the needles vanished. his knees sagged, but he forced them stiff.
he would not fall to his knees; he would not give her the satisfaction. the void was gone, too, as
suddenly as it had come.she was trying to kill me . panting, he raised his head. moiraine stood in the
doorway.
i asked what is going on here, liandrin, she said.
i found this boy here, the red aes sedai replied calmly. the guards are murdered, and here he is.
one of yours. and what are you doing here, moiraine? the battle is above, not here.
i could ask the same of you, liandrin. moiraine looked around the room with only a slight tightening of
her mouth for the charnel. why areyou here?
rand turned away from them, awkwardly shoved back the bolts on the inner door and pulled it open.
egwene came down here, he announced for anyone who cared, and went in, holding his lamp high. his
knees kept wanting to give way; he was not sure how he stayed on his feet, only that he had to find
egwene. egwene!
a hollow gurgle and a thrashing sound came from his right, and he thrust the lamp that way. the prisoner
in the fancy coat was sagging against the iron grille of his cell, his belt looped around the bars and then
around his neck. as rand looked, he gave one last kick, scraping across the strawcovered floor, and
was still, tongue and eyes bulging out of a face gone almost black. his knees almost touched the floor; he
could have stood anytime he wanted to.
shivering, rand peered into the next cell. the big man with the sunken knuckles huddled in the back of
his cell, eyes as wide as they could open. at the sight of rand, he screamed and twisted around, clawing
frantically at the stone wall.
i wont hurt you, rand called. the man kept on screaming and digging. his hands were bloody, and
his scrabblings streaked across dark, congealed smears. this was not his first attempt to dig through the
stone with his bare hands.
rand turned away, relieved that his stomach was already empty. but there was nothing he could do for
either of them. egwene!
his light finally reached the end of the cells. the door to fains cell stood open, and the cell was empty,
but it was the two shapes on the stone in front of the cell that made rand leap forward and drop to his
knees between them.
egwene and mat lay sprawled bonelessly, unconscious . . . or dead. with a flood of relief he saw their
chests rise and fall. there did not seem to be a mark on either of them.
egwene? mat? setting the sword down, he shook egwene gently. egwene? she did not open her
eyes. moiraine! egwenes hurt! and mat! mats breathing sounded labored, and his face was deathly



pale. rand felt almost like crying.it was supposed to hurt me. i named the dark one. me!
do not move them. moiraine did not sound upset, or even surprised.
the chamber was suddenly flooded with light as the two aes sedai entered. each balanced a glowing
ball of cool light, floating in the air above her hand.
liandrin marched straight down the middle of the wide hall, holding her skirts up out of the straw with
her free hand, but moiraine paused to look at the two prisoners before following. there is nothing to do
for the one, she said, and the other can wait.
liandrin reached rand first and began to bend toward egwene, but moiraine darted in ahead of her and
laid her free hand on egwenes head. liandrin straightened with a grimace.
she is not badly hurt, moiraine said after a moment. she was struck here. she traced an area on the
side of egwenes head, covered by her hair; rand could see nothing different about it. that is the only
injury she has taken. she will be all right.
rand looked from one aes sedai to the other. what about mat? liandrin arched an eyebrow at him
and turned to watch moiraine with a wry expression.
be quiet, moiraine said. fingers still lying on the area where she said egwene had been hit, she closed
her eyes. egwene murmured and stirred, then lay still.
is she . . .?
she is sleeping, rand. she will be well, but she must sleep. moiraine shifted to mat, but here she only
touched him for a moment before drawing back. this is more serious, she said softly. she fumbled at
mats waist, pulling his coat open, and made an angry sound. the dagger is gone.
what dagger? liandrin asked.
voices suddenly came from the outer room, men exclaiming in disgust and anger.
in here, moiraine called. bring two litters. quickly. someone in the outer room raised a cry for
litters.
fain is gone, rand said.
the two aes sedai looked at him. he could read nothing on their faces. their eyes glittered in the light.
so i see, moiraine said in a flat voice.
i told her not to come. i told her he was dangerous.
when i came, liandrin said in a cold voice, he was destroying the writing in the outer chamber.
he shifted uneasily on his knees. the aes sedais eyes seemed alike, now. measuring and weighing him,
cool and terrible.
it  it was filth, he said. just filth. they still looked at him, not speaking. you dont think i . . .



moiraine, you cant think i had anything to do with  with what happened out there.light, did i? i
named the dark one.
she did not answer, and he felt a chill that was not lessened by men rushing in with torches and lamps.
moiraine and liandrin let their glowing balls wink out. the lamps and torches did not give as much light;
shadows sprang up in the depths of the cells. men with litters hurried to the figures lying on the floor.
ingtar led them. his topknot almost quivered with anger, and he looked eager to find something on which
to use his sword.
so the darkfriend is gone, too, he growled. well, its the least of what has happened this night.
the least even here, moiraine said sharply. she directed the men putting egwene and mat on the
litters. the girl is to be taken to her room. she needs a woman to watch in case she wakes in the night.
she may be frightened, but more than anything else she needs sleep, now. the boy . . . she touched
mat as two men lifted his litter, and pulled her hand back quickly. take him to the amyrlin seats
chambers. find the amyrlin wherever she is, and tell her he is there. tell her his name is matrim cauthon.
i will join her as soon as i am able.
the amyrlin! liandrin exclaimed. you think to have the amyrlin as healer for your  your pet? you
are mad, moiraine.
the amyrlin seat, moiraine said calmly, does not share your red ajah prejudices, liandrin. she will
heal a man without need of a special use for him. go ahead, she told the litter bearers.
liandrin watched them leave, moiraine and the men carrying mat and egwene, then turned to stare at
rand. he tried to ignore her. he concentrated on scabbarding his sword and brushing off the straw that
clung to his shirt and breeches. when he raised his head, though, she was still studying him, her face as
blank as ice. saying nothing, she turned to consider the other men thoughtfully. one held the body of the
hanged man up while another worked to unfasten the belt. ingtar and the others waited respectfully. with
a last glance at rand, she left, head held like a queen.
a hard woman, ingtar muttered, then seemed surprised that he had spoken. what happened here,
rand althor?
rand shook his head. i dont know, except that fain escaped somehow. and hurt egwene and mat
doing it. i saw the guardroom  he shuddered  but in here . . . whatever it was, ingtar, it scared
that fellow bad enough that he hung himself. i think the other ones gone mad from seeing it.
we are all going mad tonight.
the fade . . . you killed it?
no! ingtar slammed his sword into its sheath; the hilt stuck up above his right shoulder. he seemed
angry and ashamed at the same time. its out of the keep by now, along with the rest of what we could
not kill.
at least youre alive, ingtar. that fade killed seven men!
alive? is that so important? suddenly ingtars face was no longer angry, but tired and full of pain. we
had it in our hands. in our hands! and we lost it, rand. lost it! he sounded as if he could not believe
what he was saying.



lost what? rand asked.
the horn! the horn of valere. its gone, chest and all.
but it was in the strongroom.
the strongroom was looted, ingtar said wearily. they did not take much, except for the horn. what
they could stuff in their pockets. i wish they had taken everything else and left that. ronan is dead, and
the watchmen he had guarding the strongroom. his voice became quiet. when i was a boy, ronan
held jehaan tower with twenty men against a thousand trollocs. he did not go down easily, though. the
old man had blood on his dagger. no man can ask more than that. he was silent for a moment. they
came in through the dog gate, and left the same way. we put an end to fifty or more, but too many
escaped. trollocs! weve never before had trollocs inside the keep. never!
how could they get in through the dog gate, ingtar? one man could stop a hundred there. and all the
gates were barred. he shifted uneasily, remembering why. the guards would not have opened it to let
anybody in.
their throats were cut, ingtar said. both good men, and yet they were butchered like pigs. it was
done from inside. someone killed them, then opened the gate. someone who could get close to them
without suspicion. someone they knew.
rand looked at the empty cell where padan fain had been. but that means . . .
yes. there are darkfriends inside fal dara. or were. we will soon know if thats the case. kajin is
checking now to see if anyone is missing. peace! treachery in fal dara keep! scowling, he looked
around the dungeon, at the men waiting for him. they all had swords, worn over feastday clothes, and
some had helmets. we arent doing any good here. out! everyone! rand joined the withdrawal. ingtar
tapped rands jerkin. what is this? have you decided to become a stableman?
its a long story, rand said. too long to tell here. maybe some other time.maybe never, if im
lucky. maybe i can escape in all this confusion. no, i cant. not until i know egwenes all right.
and mat. light, what will happen to him without the dagger? i suppose lord agelmars doubled
the guard on all the gates.
tripled, ingtar said in tones of satisfaction. no one will pass those gates, from inside or out. as soon
as lord agelmar heard what had happened, he ordered that no one was to be allowed to leave the keep
without his personal permission.
as soon as he heard. . .?ingtar, what about before? what about the earlier order keeping everyone
in?
earlier order? what earlier order? rand, the keep was not closed until lord agelmar heard of this.
someone told you wrong.
rand shook his head slowly. neither ragan nor tema would have made up something like that. and
even if the amyrlin seat had given the order, ingtar would have to know of it.so who? and how? he
glanced sideways at ingtar, wondering if the shienaran was lying.you really are going mad if you
suspect ingtar.



they were in the dungeon guardroom, now. the severed heads and the pieces of the guards had been
removed, though there were still red smears on the table and damp patches in the straw to show where
they had been. two aes sedai were there, placidlooking women with brownfringed shawls, studying
the words scrawled on the walls, careless of what their skirts dragged through in the straw. each had an
inkpot in a writingcase hung at her belt and was making notes in a small book with a pen. they never
even glanced at the men trooping through.
look here, verin, one of them said, pointing to a section of stone covered with lines of trolloc script.
this looks interesting.
the other hurried over, picking up reddish stains on her skirt. yes, i see. a much better hand than the
rest. not a trolloc. very interesting. she began writing in her book, looking up every so often to read
the angular letters on the wall.
rand hurried out. even if they had not been aes sedai, he would not have wanted to remain in the same
room with anyone who thought reading trolloc script written in human blood was interesting.
ingtar and his men stalked on ahead, intent on their duties. rand dawdled, wondering where he could go
now. getting back into the womens apartments would not be easy without egwene to help.light, let
her be all right. moiraine said shed be all right.
lan found him before he reached the first stairs leading up. you can go back to your room, if you want,
sheepherder. moiraine had your things fetched from egwenes room and taken to yours.
how did she know . . .?
moiraine knows a great many things, sheepherder. you should understand that by now. you had better
watch yourself. the women are all talking about you running through the halls, waving a sword. staring
down the amyrlin, so they say.
light! i am sorry theyre angry, lan, but i was invited in. and when i heard the alarm . . . burn me,
egwene was down here!
lan pursed his lips thoughtfully; it was the only expression on his face. oh, theyre not angry, exactly.
though most of them think you need a strong hand to settle you down some. fascinated is more like it.
even the lady amalisa cant stop asking questions about you. some of them are starting to believe the
servants tales. they think youre a prince in disguise, sheepherder. not a bad thing. there is an old
saying here in the borderlands: better to have one woman on your side than ten men. the way they are
talking among themselves, theyre trying to decide whose daughter is strong enough to handle you. if you
dont watch your step, sheepherder, you will find yourself married into a shienaran house before you
realize what has happened. suddenly he burst out laughing; it looked odd, like a rock laughing. running
through the halls of the womens apartments in the middle of the night, wearing a laborers jerkin and
waving a sword. if they dont have you flogged, at the very least theyll talk about you for years. they
have never seen a male as peculiar as you. whatever wife they chose for you, shed probably have you
the head of your own house in ten years, and have you thinking you had done it yourself, besides. it is
too bad you have to leave.
rand had been gaping at the warder, but now he growled, i have been trying. the gates are guarded,
and no one can leave. i tried while it was still daylight. i couldnt even take red out of the stable.
no matter, now. moiraine sent me to tell you. you can leave anytime you want to. even right now.



moiraine had agelmar exempt you from the order.
why now, and not earlier? why couldnt i leave before? was she the one who had the gates barred
then? ingtar said he knew nothing about any order to keep people in before tonight.
rand thought the warder looked troubled, but all he said was, when someone gives you a horse,
sheepherder, dont complain that it isnt as fast as youd like.
what about egwene? and mat? are they really all right? i cant leave until i know theyre all right.
the girl is fine. shell wake in the morning, and probably not even remember what happened. blows to
the head are like that.
what about mat?
the choice is up to you, sheepherder. you can leave now, or tomorrow, or next week. its up to you.
he walked away, leaving rand standing there in the corridor deep under fal dara keep.

chapter 7

blood calls blood

as the litter carrying mat left the amyrlin seats chambers, moiraine carefully rewrapped theangreal 
a small, agedarkened ivory carving of a woman in flowing robes  in a square of silk and put it back
into her pouch. working together with other aes sedai, merging their abilities, channeling the flow of the
one power to a single task, was tiring work under the best conditions, even with the aid of anangreal ,
and working through the night without sleep was not the best conditions. and the work they had done on
the boy had not been easy.
leane directed the litter bearers out with sharp gestures and a few crisp words. the two men kept
ducking their heads, nervous at being around so many aes sedai at once, and one of them the amyrlin
herself, never mind that the aes sedai had been using the power. they had waited in the corridor,
squatting against the wall while the work was done, and they were anxious to be gone from the womens
apartments. mat lay with his eyes closed and his face pale, but his chest rose and fell in the even rhythm
of a deep sleep.
how will this affect matters? moiraine wondered. he is not necessary with the horn gone, and
yet. . .



the door closed behind leane and the litter bearers, and the amyrlin drew an unsteady breath. a nasty
business that. nasty. her face was smooth, but she rubbed her hands together as if she wanted to wash
them.
but quite interesting, verin said. she had been the fourth aes sedai the amyrlin had chosen for the
work. it is too bad we  i  do not have the dagger so the healing could be complete. for all we did
tonight, he will not live long. months, perhaps, at best. the three aes sedai were alone in the amyrlins
chambers. beyond the arrowslits dawn pearled the sky.
but he will have those months, now, moiraine said sharply. and if it can be retrieved, the link can still
be broken.if it can be retrieved. yes, of course.
it can still be broken, verin agreed. she was a plump, squarefaced woman, and even with the aes
sedai gift of agelessness, there was a touch of gray in her brown hair. that was her only sign of age, but
for an aes sedai it meant she was very old indeed. her voice held steady, though, matching her smooth
cheeks. he has been linked to the dagger a long time, however, as a thing like that must be reckoned.
and he will be linked longer yet, whether it is found or not. he may already be changed beyond the
reach of full healing, even if no longer enough to contaminate others. such a small thing, that dagger, she
mused, but it will corrupt whoever carries it long enough. he who carries it will in turn corrupt those
who come in contact with him, and they will corrupt still others, and the hatred and suspicion that
destroyed shadar logoth, every man and womans hand turned against every other, will be loose in the
world again. i wonder how many people it can taint in, say, a year. it should be possible to calculate a
reasonable approximation.
moiraine gave the brown sister a wry look.another danger confronts us, and she sounds as if it is a
puzzle in a book. light, the browns truly are not aware of the world at all . then we must find the
dagger, sister. agelmar is sending men to hunt those who took the horn and slew his oathmen, the same
who took the dagger. if one is found, the other will be.
verin nodded, but frowned at the same time. yet, even if it is found, who can return it safely? whoever
touches it risks the taint if they handle it long. perhaps in a chest, well wrapped and padded, but it would
still be dangerous to those nearby for any great time. without the dagger itself to study, we cannot be
sure how much it must be shielded. but you saw it and more, moiraine. you dealt with it, enough for that
young man to survive carrying it and to stop him infecting others. you must have a good idea of how
strong its influence is.
there is one, moiraine said, who can retrieve the dagger without being harmed by it. one whom we
have shielded and buffered against that taint as much as anyone can be. mat cauthon.
the amyrlin nodded. yes, of course. he can do it. if he lives long enough. the light only knows how
far it will be carried before agelmars men find it. if they do find it. and if the boy dies first . . . well, if the
dagger is loose that long, we have another worry. she rubbed her eyes tiredly. i think we must find this
padan fain, too. why is this darkfriend important enough for them to risk what they did to rescue him?
much easier for them just to steal the horn. still risky as a winter gale in the sea of storms, coming into
the very keep like that, but they compounded their risk to free this darkfriend. if the lurks think he is
that important  she paused, and moiraine knew she was wondering if it truly was still only the
myrddraal giving commands  then so must we.
he must be found, moiraine agreed, hoping that none of the urgency she felt showed, but it is likely
he will be found with the horn.



as you say, daughter. the amyrlin pressed fingers to her lips to stifle a yawn. and now, verin, if you
will excuse me, i will just say a few words to moiraine and then sleep a little. i suppose agelmar will
insist on feasting tonight since last night was spoiled. your help was invaluable, daughter. please
remember, say nothing of the nature of the boys hurt to anyone. there are some of your sisters who
would see the shadow in him instead of a thing men made on their own.
there was no need to name the red ajah. and perhaps, moiraine thought, the reds were no longer the
only ones of whom it was necessary to be wary.
i will say nothing, of course, mother. verin bowed, but made no move toward the door. i thought
you might wish to see this, mother. she pulled a small notebook, bound in soft, brown leather, from her
belt. what was written on the walls in the dungeon. there were few problems with translation. most
was the usual  blasphemy and boasting; trollocs seem to know little else  but there was one part
done in a better hand. an educated darkfriend, or perhaps a myrddraal. it could be only taunting, yet it
has the form of poetry, or song, and the sound of prophecy. we know little of prophecies from the
shadow, mother.
the amyrlin hesitated only a moment before nodding. prophecies from the shadow, dark prophecies,
had an unfortunate way of being fulfilled as well as prophecies from the light. read it to me.
verin ruffled through the pages, then cleared her throat and began in a calm, level voice.

daughter of the night, she walks again.
the ancient war, she yet fights.
her new lover she seeks, who shall serve her and die,
yet serve still.
who shall stand against her coming?
the shining walls shall kneel.
blood feeds blood.
blood calls blood.
blood is, and blood was, and blood shall ever be.
the man who channels stands alone.
he gives his friends for sacrifice.
two roads before him, one to death beyond dying,
one to life eternal.
which will he choose? which will he choose?
what hand shelters? what hand slays?
blood feeds blood.
blood calls blood.
blood is, and blood was, and blood shall ever be.
luc came to the mountains of dhoom.
isam waited in the high passes.
the hunt is now begun. the shadows hounds now course,
and kill.
one did live, and one did die, but both are.
the time of change has come.
blood feeds blood.
blood calls blood.



blood is, and blood was, and blood shall ever be.
the watchers wait on tomans head.
the seed of the hammer burns the ancient tree.
death shall sow, and summer burn, before the great lord comes.
death shall reap, and bodies fail, before the great lord comes.
again the seed slays ancient wrong, before the great lord comes.
now the great lord comes.
now the great lord comes.
blood feeds blood.
blood calls blood.
blood is, and blood was, and blood shall ever be.
now the great lord comes.

there was a long silence when she finished.
finally the amyrlin said, who else has seen this, daughter? who knows of it?
only serafelle, mother. as soon as we had copied it down, i had men scrub the walls. they didnt
question; they were eager to be rid of it.
the amyrlin nodded. good. too many in the borderlands can puzzle out trolloc script. no need to
give them something else to worry over. they have enough.
what do you make of it? moiraine asked verin in a careful voice. is it prophecy, do you think?
verin tilted her head, peering at her notes in thought. possibly. it has the form of some of the few dark
prophecies we know. and parts of it are clear enough. it could still be only a taunt, though. she rested a
finger on one line. daughter of the night, she walks again. that can only mean lanfear is loose again.
or someone wants us to think she is.
that would be something to worry us, daughter, the amyrlin seat said, if it were true. but the
forsaken are still bound. she glanced at moiraine, looking troubled for an instant before she schooled
her features. even if the sealsare weakening, the forsaken are still bound.
lanfear. in the old tongue, daughter of the night. nowhere was her real name recorded, but that was
the name she had taken for herself, unlike most of the forsaken, who had been named by those they
betrayed. some said she had really been the most powerful of the forsaken, next to ishamael, the
betrayer of hope, but had kept her powers hidden. too little was left from that time for any scholar to
say for certain.
with all the false dragons that are appearing, it is not surprising someone would try to bring lanfear
into it. moiraines voice was as unruffled as her face, but inside herself she roiled. only one thing for
certain was known of lanfear beside the name: before she went over to the shadow, before lews
therin telamon met ilyena, lanfear had been his lover.a complication we do notneed.
the amyrlin seat frowned as if she had had the same thought, but verin nodded as if it were all just
words. other names are clear, too, mother. lord luc, of course, was brother to tigraine, then the
daughterheir of andor, and he vanished in the blight. who isam is, or what he has to do with luc, i do
not know, however.



we will find out what we need to know in time, moiraine said smoothly. there is no proof as yet that
this is prophecy. she knew the name. isam had been the son of breyan, wife of lain mandragoran,
whose attempt to seize the throne of malkier for her husband had brought the trolloc hordes crashing
down. breyan and her infant son had both vanished when the trollocs overran malkier. and isam had
been blood kin to lan.or isblood kin? i must keep this from him, until i know how he will react.
until we are away from the blight. if he thought isam were alive . . .
the watchers wait on toman head, verin went on. there are a few who still cling to the old belief
that the armies artur hawkwing sent across the aryth ocean will return one day, though after all this time
. . .  she gave a disdainful sniff. the do miere avron, the watchers over the waves, still have a . . .
community is the best word, i suppose . . . on toman head, at falme. and one of the old names for
artur hawkwing was hammer of the light.
are you suggesting, daughter, the amyrlin seat said, that artur hawkwings armies, or rather their
descendants, might actually return after a thousand years?
there are rumors of war on almoth plain and toman head, moiraine said slowly. and hawkwing
sent two of his sons, as well as armies. if they did survive in whatever lands they found, there could well
be many descendants of hawkwing. or none.
the amyrlin gave moiraine a guarded look, obviously wishing they were alone so she could demand to
know what moiraine was up to. moiraine made a soothing gesture, and her old friend grimaced at her.
verin, with her nose still buried in her notes, noticed none of it. i dont know, mother. i doubt it,
though. we know nothing at all of those lands artur hawkwing set out to conquer. its too bad the sea
folk refuse to cross the aryth ocean. they say the islands of the dead lie on the other side. i wish i
knew what they meant by that, but that accursed sea folk closemouthedness . . . she sighed, still not
raising her head. all we have is one reference to lands under the shadow, beyond the setting sun,
beyond the aryth ocean, where the armies of night reign. nothing there to tell us if the armies
hawkwing sent were enough by themselves to defeat these armies of the night, or even to survive
hawkwings death. once the war of the hundred years started, everyone was too intent on carving out
their own part of hawkwings empire to spare a thought for his armies across the sea. it seems to me,
mother, that if their descendants still lived, and if they ever intended to return, they would not have
waited so long.
then you believe it is not prophecy, daughter?
now, the ancient tree, verin said, immersed in her own thoughts. there have always been rumors
 no more than that  that while the nation of almoth still lived, they had a branch ofavendesora ,
perhaps even a living sapling. and the banner of almoth was blue for the sky above, black for the earth
below, with the spreading tree of life to join them. of course, taraboners call themselves the tree of
man, and claim to be descended from rulers and nobles in the age of legends. and domani claim
descent from those who made the tree of life in the age of legends. there are other possibilities, but
you will note, mother, that at least three center around almoth plain and toman head.
the amyrlins voice became deceptively gentle. will you make up your mind, daughter? if artur
hawkwings seed isnot returning, then this is not prophecy and it doesnt matter a rotted fish head what
ancient tree is meant.
i can only give you what i know, mother, verin said, looking up from her notes, and leave the



decision in your hands. i believe the last of artur hawkwings foreign armies died long ago, but because
i believe it does not make it so. the time of change, of course, refers to the end of an age, and the
great lord  
the amyrlin slapped the tabletop like a thunderclap. i know very well who the great lord is,
daughter. i think you had better go now. she took a deep breath, and took hold of herself visibly. go,
verin. i do not want to become angry with you. i do not want to forget who it was had the cooks leave
sweetcakes out at night when i was a novice.
mother, moiraine said, there is nothing in this to suggest prophecy. anyone with a little wit and a little
knowledge could put together as much, and no one has ever said myrddraal do not have a sly wit.
and of course, verin said calmly, the man who channels must be one of the three young men traveling
with you, moiraine.
moiraine stared in shock.not aware of the world? i am a fool . before she realized what she was
doing, she had reached out to the pulsing glow she always felt there waiting, to the true source. the one
power surged along her veins, charging her with energy, muting the sheen of power from the amyrlin
seat as she did the same. moiraine had never before even thought of wielding the power against another
aes sedai.we live in perilous times, and the world hangs in the balance, and what must be done,
must be done. it must. oh, verin, why did you have to put your nose in where it does not belong?
verin closed her book and slipped it back behind her belt, then looked from one woman to the other.
she could not but be aware of the nimbus surrounding each of them, the light that came from touching the
true source. only someone trained in channeling herself could see the glow, but there was no chance of
any aes sedai missing it in another woman.
a hint of satisfaction settled on verins face, but no sign that she realized she had hurled a lightning bolt.
she only looked as if she had found another piece that fit in a puzzle. yes, i thought it must be so.
moiraine could not do this alone, and who better to help than her girlhood friend who used to sneak
down with her to snitch sweetcakes. she blinked. forgive me, mother. i should not have said that.
verin, verin. the amyrlin shook her head wonderingly. you accuse your sister  and me?  of . .
. i wont even say it. and you are worried that youve spoken too familiarly to the amyrlin seat? you
bore a hole in the boat and worry that its raining. think what you are suggesting, daughter.
it is too late for that, siuan, moiraine thought.if we had not panicked and reached for the source,
perhaps then . . .but she is sure, now . why are you telling us this, verin? she said aloud. if you
believe what you say, you should be telling it to the other sisters, to the reds in particular.
verins eyes widened in surprise. yes. yes, i suppose i should. i hadnt thought of that. but then, if i
did, you would be stilled, moiraine, and you, mother, and the man gentled. no one has ever recorded
the progression in a man who wields the power. when does the madness come, exactly, and how does it
take him? how quickly does it grow? can he still function with his body rotting around him? for how
long? unless he is gentled, what will happen to the young man, whichever he is, will happen whether or
not i am there to put down the answers. if he is watched and guided, we should be able to keep some
record with reasonable safety, for a time, at least. and, too, there isthe karaethon cycle . she calmly
returned their startled looks. i assume, mother, that heis the dragon reborn? i cannot believe you
would do this  leave walking free a man who can channel  unless he was the dragon.
she thinks only of the knowledge, moiraine thought wonderingly.the culmination of the direst



prophecy the world knows, perhaps the end of the world, and she cares only about the knowledge.
but she is still dangerous, for that.
who else knows of this? the amyrlins voice was faint, but still sharp. serafelle, i suppose. who
else, verin?
no one, mother. serafelle is not really interested in anything that someone hasnt already set down in a
book, preferably as long ago as possible. she thinks there are enough old books and manuscripts and
fragments scattered about, lost or forgotten, to equal ten times what we have gathered in tar valon. she
feels certain there is enough of the old knowledge still there to be found for  
enough, sister, moiraine said. she loosed her hold on the true source, and after a moment felt the
amyrlin do the same. it was always a loss to feel the power draining away, like blood and life pouring
from an open wound. a part of her wanted to hold on, but unlike some of her sisters, she made it a point
of selfdiscipline not to grow too fond of the feeling. sit down, verin, and tell us what you know and
how you found it out. leave out nothing.
as verin took a chair  with a look to the amyrlin for permission to sit in her presence  moiraine
watched her sadly.
it is unlikely, verin began, that anyone who hasnt studied the old records thoroughly would notice
anything except that you were behaving oddly. forgive me, mother. it was nearly twenty years ago, with
tar valon besieged, that i had my first clue, and that was only . . .
light help me, verin, how i loved you for those sweetcakes, and for your bosom to weep on. but i
will do what i must do. i will. i must.

perrin peered around the corner at the retreating back of the aes sedai. she smelled of lavender soap,
though most would not have scented it even close up. as soon as she turned out of sight, he hurried for
the infirmary door. he had already tried to see mat once, and that aes sedai  leane, he had heard
somebody, call her  had nearly snapped his head off without even looking around to see who he was.
he felt uneasy around aes sedai, especially if they started looking at his eyes.
pausing at the door to listen  he could hear no footsteps down the corridor either way, and nothing on
the other side of the door  he went in and closed it softly behind him.
the infirmary was a long room with white walls, and the entrances to archers balconies at either end let
in lots of light. mat was in one of the narrow beds that lined the walls. after last night, perrin had
expected most of the beds to have men in them, but in a moment he realized the keep was full of aes
sedai. the only thing an aes sedai could not cure by healing was death. to him, the room smelled of
sickness anyway.
perrin grimaced when he thought of that. mat lay still, eyes closed, hands unmoving atop his blankets.
he looked exhausted. not sick really, but as if he had worked three days in the fields and only now laid
down to rest. he smelled . . . wrong, though. it was nothing perrin could put a name to, just wrong.
perrin sat down carefully on the bed next to mats. he always did things carefully. he was bigger than
most people, and had been bigger than the other boys as long as he could remember. he had had to be
careful so he would not hurt someone accidentally, or break things. now it was second nature to him. he



liked to think things through, too, and sometimes talk them over with somebody.with rand thinking
hes a lord, i cant talk to him, and mat certainly isnt going to have much to say.
he had gone into one of the gardens the night before, to think things through. the memory still made him
a little ashamed. if he had not gone, he would have been in his room to go with egwene and mat, and
maybe he could have kept them from being hurt. more likely, he knew, he would be in one of these
beds, like mat, or dead, but that did not change the way he felt. still, he had gone to the garden, and it
was nothing to do with the trolloc attack that was worrying him now.
serving women had found him sitting there in the dark, and one of the lady amalisas attendants, the
lady timora. as soon as they came upon him, timora sent one of the others running, and he had heard
her say, find liandrin sedai! quickly!
they had stood there watching him as if they had thought he might vanish in a puff of smoke like a
gleeman. that had been when the first alarm bell rang, and everybody in the keep started running.
liandrin, he muttered now. red ajah. about all they do is hunt for men who channel. you dont
think she believes im one of those, do you? mat did not answer, of course. perrin rubbed his nose
ruefully. now im talking to myself. i dont need that on top of everything else.
mats eyelids fluttered. who . . . ? perrin? what happened? his eyes did not open all the way, and his
voice sounded as if he were still mostly asleep.
dont you remember, mat?
remember? mat sleepily raised a hand toward his face, then let it fall again with a sigh. his eyes began
to drift shut. remember egwene. asked me . . . go down . . . see fain. he laughed, and it turned into a
yawn. she didnt ask. told me . . . dont know what happened after . . . he smacked his lips, and
resumed the deep, even breathing of sleep.
perrin leaped to his feet as his ears caught the sound of approaching footsteps, but there was nowhere to
go. he was still standing there beside mats bed when the door opened and leane came in. she
stopped, put her fists on her hips, and looked him slowly up and down. she was nearly as tall as he was.
now you, she said, in tones quiet yet brisk, are almost a pretty enough boy to make me wish i was a
green. almost. but if youve disturbed my patient . . . well, i dealt with brothers almost as big as you
before i went to the tower, so you neednt think those shoulders will help you any.
perrin cleared his throat. half the time he did not understand what women meant when they said things.
not like rand. he always knows what to say to the girls . he realized he was scowling and wiped it
away. he did not want to think about rand, but he certainly did not want to upset an aes sedai,
especially one who was beginning to tap her foot impatiently. ah . . . i didnt disturb him. hes still
sleeping. see?
so he is. a good thing for you. now, what are you doing in here? i remember chasing you out once;
you neednt think i dont.
i only wanted to know how he is.
she hesitated. he is sleeping is how he is. and in a few hours, he will get out of that bed, and youll
think there was never anything wrong with him.



the pause made his hackles rise. she was lying, somehow. aes sedai never lied, but they did not
always tell the truth, either. he was not certain what was going on  liandrin looking for him, leane
lying to him  but he thought it was time he got away from aes sedai. there was nothing he could do
for mat.
thank you, he said. id better let him sleep, then. excuse me.
he tried to slide around her to the door, but suddenly her hands shot out and grabbed his face, tilting it
down so she could peer into his eyes. something seemed to pass through him, a warm ripple that started
at the top of his head and went to his feet, then came back again. he pulled his head out of her hands.
youre as healthy as a young wild animal, she said, pursing her lips. but if you were born with those
eyes, i am a whitecloak.
theyre the only eyes i ever had, he growled. he felt a little abashed, speaking to an aes sedai in that
tone, but he was as surprised as she when he took her gently by the arms and lifted her to one side,
setting her down again out of his way. as they stared at each other, he wondered if his eyes were as
wide with shock as hers. excuse me, he said again, and all but ran.
my eyes. my lightcursed eyes!the morning sunlight caught his eyes, and they glinted like burnished
gold.
rand twisted on his bed, trying to find a comfortable position on the thin mattress. sunlight streamed
through the arrowslits, painting the bare stone walls. he had not slept during the remainder of the night,
and tired as he was, he was sure he could not sleep now. the leather jerkin lay on the floor between his
bed and the wall, but aside from that he was fully dressed, even to his new boots. his sword stood
propped beside the bed, and his bow and quiver rested in a corner across the bundled cloaks.
he could not rid himself of the feeling that he should take the chance moiraine had given him and leave
immediately. the urge had been with him all night. three times he had risen to go. twice he had gone as
far as opening the door. the halls had been empty except for a few servants doing late chores; the way
had been clear. but he had to know.
perrin came in, head down and yawning, and rand sat up. how is egwene? and mat?
shes asleep, so they tell me. they wouldnt let me into the womens apartments to see her. mat is  
suddenly perrin scowled at the floor. if youre so interested, why havent you gone to see him yourself?
i thought you were not interested in us anymore. you said you werent. he pulled open his door of the
wardrobe and began rummaging for a clean shirt.
i did go to the infirmary, perrin. there was an aes sedai there, that tall one whos always with the
amyrlin seat. she said mat was asleep, and i was in the way, and i could come back some other time.
she sounded like master thane ordering the men at the mill. you know how master thane is, all full of
snap and do it right the first time, and do it right now.
perrin did not answer. he just shucked off his coat and pulled his shirt off over his head.
rand studied his friends back for a moment, then dug up a laugh. you want to hear something? you
know what she said to me? the aes sedai in the infirmary, i mean. you saw how tall she is. as tall as
most men. a hand taller, and she could almost look me in the eyes. well, she stared me up and down,



and then she muttered, tall, arent you? where were you when i was sixteen? or even thirty? and then
she laughed, as if it was all a joke. what do you think of that?
perrin finished tugging on a clean shirt and gave him a sidelong look. with his burly shoulders and thick
curls, he made rand think of a hurt bear. a bear that did not understand why had he been hurt.
perrin, im  
if you want to make jokes with aes sedai, perrin broke in, thats up to you. my lord. he began
stuffing his shirttail into his breeches. i dont spend much time being  witty; is that the word?  witty
with aes sedai. but then, im only a clumsy blacksmith, and i might be in somebodys way. my lord.
snatching his coat from the floor, he started for the door.
burn me, perrin, im sorry. i was afraid, and i thought i was in trouble  maybe i was; maybe i still
am, i dont know  and i didnt want you and mat to be in it with me. light, all the women were
looking for me last night. i think thats part of the trouble im in. i think so. and liandrin . . . she . . . he
threw up his hands. perrin, believe me, you dont want any part of this.
perrin had stopped, but he stood facing the door and only turned his head enough for rand to see one
golden eye. looking for you? maybe they were looking for all of us.
no, they were looking for me. i wish they hadnt been, but i know better.
perrin shook his head. liandrin wanted me, anyway, i know. i heard.
rand frowned. why would she . . .? it doesnt change anything. look, i opened my mouth and said
what i shouldnt. i did not mean it, perrin. now, please, would you tell me about mat?
hes asleep. leane  thats the aes sedai  said he would be on his feet in a few hours. he
shrugged uncomfortably. i think she was lying. i know aes sedai never lie, not so you can catch them,
but she was lying, or keeping something back. he paused, looking at rand sideways. you didnt mean
all that? we will leave here together? you, and me, and mat?
i cant, perrin. i cant tell you why, but i really do have to go by myse  perrin, wait!
the door slammed behind his friend.
rand fell back on the bed. i cant tell you, he muttered. he pounded his fist on the side of the bed. i
cant.but you can go now , a voice said in the back of his head.egwenes going to be all right, and
mat will be up and around in an hour or two. you can go now. before moiraine changes her mind.
he started to sit up when a pounding on the door made him leap to his feet. if it was perrin come back,
he would not knock. the pounding came again.
who is it?
lan strode in, pushing the door to behind him with his boot heel. as usual, he wore his sword over a
plain coat of green that was nearly invisible in the woods. this time, though, he had a wide, golden cord
tied high around his left arm, the fringed ends hanging almost to his elbow. on the knot was pinned a
golden crane in flight, the symbol of malkier.



the amyrlin seat wants you, sheepherder. you cant go like that. out of that shirt and brush your hair.
you look like a haystack. he jerked open the wardrobe and began pawing through the clothes rand
meant to leave behind.
rand stood stiff where he was; he felt as though he had been hit in the head with a hammer. he had
expected it, of course, in a way, but he had been sure he would be gone before the summons came.she
knows. light, im sure of it . what do you mean, she wants me? im leaving, lan. you were right. i
am going to the stable right now, get my horse, and leave.
you should have done that last night. the warder tossed a white silk shirt onto the bed. no one
refuses an audience with the amyrlin seat, sheepherder. not the lord captain commander of the
whitecloaks himself. pedron niall might spend the trip planning how to kill her, if he could do it and get
away, but he would come. he turned around with one of the highcollared coats in his hands and held it
up. this one will do. tangled, longthorned briars climbed each red sleeve in a thick, gold embroidered
line, and ran around each cuff. golden herons stood on the collars, which were edged with gold. the
color is right, too. he seemed to be amused at something, or satisfied. come on, sheepherder. change
your shirt. move.
reluctantly rand pulled the coarse wool workmans shirt over his head. ill feel a fool, he muttered.
a silk shirt! i never wore a silk shirt in my life. and i never wore so fancy a coat, either, even on a
feastday.light, if perrin sees me in that . . .burn me, after all that fool talk about being a lord, if
he sees me in that, hell never listen to reason.
you cant go before the amyrlin seat dressed like a groom fresh out of the stables, sheepherder. let
me see your boots. theyll do. well, get on with it, get on with it. you dont keep the amyrlin waiting.
wear your sword.
my sword! the silk shirt over his head muffled rands yelp. he yanked it the rest of the way on. in
the womens apartments? lan, if i go for an audience with the amyrlin seat  the amyrlin seat! 
wearing a sword, shell  
do nothing, lan cut him off dryly. if the amyrlin is afraid of you  and its smarter for you to think
she isnt, because i dont know anything that could frighten that woman  it wont be for a sword. now
remember, you kneel when you go before her. one knee only, mind, he added sharply. youre not
some merchant caught giving short weight. maybe you had better practice it.
i know how, i think. i saw how the queens guards knelt to queen morgase.
the ghost of a smile touched the warders lips. yes, you do it just as they did. that will give them
something to think about.
rand frowned. why are you telling me this, lan? youre a warder. youre acting as if you are on my
side.
i am on your side, sheepherder. a little. enough to help you a bit. the warders face was stone, and
sympathetic words sounded strange in that rough voice. what training youve had, i gave you, and ill
not have you groveling and sniveling. the wheel weaves us all into the pattern as it wills. you have less
freedom about it than most, but by the light, you can still face it on your feet. you remember who the
amyrlin seat is, sheepherder, and you show her proper respect, but you do what i tell you, and you look
her in the eye. well, dont stand there gaping. tuck in your shirt.



rand shut his mouth and tucked in his shirt.remember who she is? burn me, what i wouldnt give to
forget who she is!
lan kept up a running flow of instructions while rand shrugged into the red coat and buckled on his
sword. what to say and to whom, and what not to say. what to do, and what not. how to move, even.
he was not sure he could remember it all  most of it sounded odd, and easy to forget  and he was
sure whatever he forgot would be just the thing to make the aes sedai angry with him.if they arent
already. if moiraine told the amyrlin seat, who else did she tell?
lan, why cant i just leave the way i planned? by the time she knew i was not coming, id be a league
outside the walls and galloping.
and shed have trackers after you before you had gone two. what the amyrlin wants, sheepherder,
she gets. he adjusted rands sword belt so the heavy buckle was centered. what i do is the best i can
for you. believe it.
but why all this? what does it mean? why do i put my hand over my heart if the amyrlin seat stands
up? why refuse anything but water  not that i want to eat a meal with her  then dribble some on the
floor and say the land thirsts ? and if she asks how old i am, why tell her how long it is since i was
given the sword? i dont understand half of what youve told me.
three drops, sheepherder, dont pour it. yousprinkle three drops only. you can understand later so
long as you remember now. think of it as upholding custom. the amyrlin will do with you as she must. if
you believe you can avoid it, then you believe you can fly to the moon like lenn. you cant escape, but
maybe you can hold your own for a while, and perhaps you can keep your pride, at least. the light burn
me, i am probably wasting my time, but ive nothing better to do. hold still. from his pocket the
warder produced a long length of wide, fringed golden cord and tied it around rands left arm in a
complicated knot. on the knot he fastened a redenameled pin, an eagle with its wings spread. i had
that made to give you, and now is as good a time as any. that will make them think. there was no
doubt about it, now. the warder was smiling.
rand looked down at the pin worriedly.caldazar . the red eagle of manetheren. a thorn to the dark
ones foot, he murmured, and a bramble to his hand. he looked at the warder. manetherens long
dead and forgotten, lan. its just a name in a book, now. there is only the two rivers. whatever else i
am, im a shepherd and a farmer. thats all.
well, the sword that could not be broken was shattered in the end, sheepherder, but it fought the
shadow to the last. there is one rule, above all others, for being a man. whatever comes, face it on your
feet. now, are you ready? the amyrlin seat waits.
with a cold knot in the pit of his belly, rand followed the warder into the hall.

chapter 8



the dragon reborn

rand walked stifflegged and nervous at first, beside the warder.face it on your feet . it was easy for
lan to say. he had not been summoned by the amyrlin seat. he was not wondering if he would be
gentled before the day was done, or worse. rand felt as if he had something caught in his throat; he could
not swallow, and he wanted to, badly.
the corridors bustled with people, servants going about their morning chores, warriors wearing swords
over lounging robes. a few young boys carrying small practice swords stayed near their elders, imitating
the way they walked. no sign remained of the fighting, but an air of alertness clung even to the children.
grown men looked like cats waiting for a pack of rats.
ingtar gave rand and lan a peculiar look, almost troubled, opening his mouth, then saying nothing as
they passed him. kajin, tall and lean and sallow, pumped his fists over his head and shouted, taishar
malkier! taishar manetheren! true blood of malkier. true blood of manetheren.
rand jumped.light, why did he say that? dont be a fool , he told himself.they all know about
manetheren here. they know every old story, if it has fighting in it. burn me, i have to take a rein
on myself.
lan raised his fists in reply. taishar shienar!
if he made a run for it, could he lose himself in the crowd long enough to reach his horse?if she sends
trackers after me . . . with every step he grew more tense.
as they approached the womens apartments, lan suddenly snapped, cat crosses the courtyard!
startled, rand instinctively assumed the walking stance as he had been taught, back straight but every
muscle loose, as if he hung from a wire at the top of his head. it was a relaxed, almost arrogant, saunter.
relaxed on the outside; he certainly did not feel it inside. he had no time to wonder what he was doing.
they rounded the last corridor in step with each other.
the women at the entrance to the womens apartments looked up calmly as they came closer. some sat
behind slanted tables, checking large ledgers and sometimes making an entry. others were knitting, or
working with needle and embroidery hoop. ladies in silks kept this watch, as well as women in livery.
the arched doors stood open, unguarded except for the women. no more was needed. no shienaran
man would enter uninvited, but any shienaran man stood ready to defend that door if needed, and he
would be aghast at the need.
rands stomach churned, harsh and acid.theyll take one look at our swords and turn us away.
well, thats what i want, isnt it? if they turn us back, maybe i can still get away. if they dont call
the guards down on us . he clung to the stance lan had given him as he would have to a floating branch



in a flood; holding it was the only thing that kept him from turning tail and running.
one of the lady amalisas attendants, nisura, a roundfaced woman, put aside her embroidery and
stood as they came to a stop. her eyes flickered across their swords, and her mouth tightened, but she
did not mention them. all the women stopped what they were doing to watch, silent and intent.
honor to you both, nisura said, bowing her head slightly. she glanced at rand, so quickly he was
almost not sure he had seen it; it reminded him of what perrin had said. the amyrlin seat awaits you.
she motioned, and two other ladies  not servants; they were being honored  stepped forward for
escorts. the women bowed, a hair more than nisura had, and motioned them through the archway. they
both gave rand a sidelong glance, then did not look at him again.
were they looking for all of us, or just me? why all of us?
inside, they got the looks rand expected  two men in the womens apartments where men were rare
 and their swords caused more than one raised eyebrow, but none of the women spoke. the two men
left knots of conversation in their path, soft murmurs too low for rand to make out. lan strode along as if
he did not even notice. rand kept pace behind their escorts and wished he could hear.
and then they reached the amyrlin seats chambers, with three aes sedai in the hall outside the door.
the tall aes sedai, leane, held her goldenflamed staff. rand did not know the other two, one of the
white ajah and one yellow by their fringe. he remembered their faces, though, staring at him as he had
run through these same halls. smooth aes sedai faces, with knowing eyes. they studied him with arched
eyebrows and pursed lips. the women who had brought lan and rand curtsied, handing them over to
the aes sedai. .
leane looked rand over with a slight smile. despite the smile, her voice had a snap to it. what have
you brought the amyrlin seat today, lan gaidin? a young lion? better you dont let any greens see this
one, or one of them will bond him before he can take a breath. greens like to bond them young.
rand wondered if it was really possible to sweat inside your skin. he felt as if he was. he wanted to
look at lan, but he remembered this part of the warders instructions. i am rand althor, son of tam
althor, of the two rivers, which once was manetheren. as i have been summoned by the amyrlin
seat, leane sedai, so do i come. i stand ready. he was surprised that his voice did not shake once.
leane blinked, and her smile faded to a thoughtful look. this is supposed to be a shepherd, lan
gaidin? he was not so sure of himself this morning.
he is a man, leane sedai, lan said firmly, no more, and no less. we are what we are.
the aes sedai shook her head. the world grows stranger every day. i suppose the blacksmith will
wear a crown and speak in high chant. wait here. she vanished inside to announce them.
she was only gone a few moments, but rand was uncomfortably aware of the eyes of the remaining aes
sedai. he tried to return their gaze levelly, the way lan had told him to, and they put their heads
together, whispering.what are they saying? what do they know? light, are they going to gentle
me? was that what lan meant about facing whatever comes?
leane returned, motioning rand to go in. when lan started to follow, she thrust her staff across his
chest, stopping him. not you, lan gaidin. moiraine sedai has a task for you. your lion cub will be safe
enough by himself.



the door swung shut behind rand, but not before he heard lans voice, fierce and strong, but low for
his ear alone. taishar manetheren!
moiraine sat to one side of the room, and one of the brown aes sedai he had seen in the dungeon sat to
the other, but it was the woman in the tall chair behind the wide table who held his eyes. the curtains had
been partially drawn over the arrowslits, but the gaps let in enough light behind her to make her face hard
to see clearly. he still recognized her, though. the amyrlin seat.
quickly he dropped to one knee, left hand on sword hilt, right fist pressed to the patterned rug, and
bowed his head. as you have summoned me, mother, so have i come. i stand ready. he lifted his
head in time to see her eyebrows rise.
do you now, boy? she sounded almost amused. and something else he could not make out. she
certainly did not look amused. stand up, boy, and let me have a look at you.
he straightened and tried to keep his face relaxed. it was an effort not to clench his hands.three aes
sedai. how many does it take to gentle a man? they sent a dozen or more after logain. would
moiraine do that to me? he met the amyrlin seats look eye to eye. she did not blink.
sit, boy, she said finally, gesturing to a ladderback chair that had been pulled around squarely in front
of the table. this will not be short, i fear.
thank you, mother. he bowed his head, then, as lan had told him, glanced at the chair and touched
his sword. by your leave, mother, i will stand. the watch is not done.
the amyrlin seat made an exasperated sound and looked at moiraine. have you let lan at him,
daughter? this will be difficult enough without him picking up warder ways.
lan has been teaching all the boys, mother, moiraine replied calmly. he has spent a little more time
with this one than the others because he carries a sword.
the brown aes sedai shifted on her chair. the gaidin are stiffnecked and proud, mother, but useful. i
would not be without tomas, as you would not lose alric. i have even heard a few reds say they
sometimes wish for a warder. and the greens, of course . . .
the three aes sedai were all ignoring him, now. this sword, the amyrlin seat said. it appears to be
a heronmark blade. how did he come by that, moiraine?
tam althor left the two rivers as a boy, mother. he joined the army of illian, and served in the
whitecloak war and the last two wars with tear. in time he rose to be a blademaster and the second
captain of the companions. after the aiel war, tam althor returned to the two rivers with a wife
from caemlyn and an infant boy. it would have saved much, had i known this earlier, but i know it now.
rand stared at moiraine. he knew tam had left the two rivers and come back with an outlander wife
and the sword, but the rest . . .where did you learn all that? not in emonds field. unless nynaeve
told you more than shes ever told me. an infant boy. she doesnt say his son. but i am.
against tear. the amyrlin seat frowned slightly. well, there was blame enough on both sides in
those wars. fool men who would rather fight than talk. can you tell if the blade is authentic, verin?



there are tests, mother.
then take it and test it, daughter.
the three women were not even looking at him. rand stepped back, gripping the hilt hard. my father
gave this sword to me, he said angrily. nobody is taking it from me. it was only then that he realized
verin had not moved from her chair. he looked at them in confusion, trying to recover his equilibrium.
so, the amyrlin seat said, you have some fire in you besides whatever lan put in. good. you will
need it.
i am what i am, mother, he managed smoothly enough. i stand ready for what comes.
the amyrlin seat grimaced. lanhas been at you. listen to me, boy. in a few hours, ingtar will leave to
find the stolen horn. your friend, mat, will go with him. i expect that your other friend  perrin?  will
go, also. do you wish to accompany them?
mat and perrin are going? why? belatedly he remembered to add a respectful, mother.
you know of the dagger your friend carried? a twist of her mouth showed what she thought of the
dagger. that was taken, too. unless it is found, the link between him and the blade cannot be broken
completely, and he will die. you can ride with them, if you want. or you can stay here. no doubt lord
agelmar will let you remain as a guest as long as you wish. i will be leaving today, as well. moiraine
sedai will accompany me, and so will egwene and nynaeve, so you will stay alone, if you stay. the
choice is yours.
rand stared at her.she is saying i can go as i want. is that what she brought me here for? mat is
dying! he glanced at moiraine, sitting impassively with her hands folded in her lap. she looked as if
nothing in the world could concern her less than where he went.which way are you trying to push me,
aes sedai? burn me, but ill go another. but if mats dying . . .i cant abandon him. light, how
are we going to find that dagger?
you do not have to make the choice now, the amyrlin said. she did not seem to care, either. but you
will have to choose before ingtar leaves.
i will ride with ingtar, mother.
the amyrlin seat nodded absently. now that that is dealt with, we can move on to important matters. i
know you can channel, boy. what do you know?
rands mouth fell open. caught up in worrying about mat, her casual words hit him like a swinging barn
door. all of lans advice and instructions went spinning. he stared at her, licking his lips. it was one thing
to think she knew, entirely another to find out she really did. the sweat finally seeped out on his
forehead.
she leaned forward in her seat, waiting for his answer, but he had the feeling she wanted to lean back.
he remembered what lan had said.if shes afraid of you . . . he wanted to laugh. ifshe was afraid of
him.
no, i cant. i mean . . . i didnt do it on purpose. it just happened. i dont want to  to channel the
power. i wont ever do it again. i swear it.



you dont want to, the amyrlin seat said. well, thats wise of you. and foolish, too. some can be
taught to channel; most cannot. a few, though, have the seed in them at birth. sooner or later, they wield
the one power whether they want to or not, as surely as roe makes fish. you will continue to channel,
boy. you cant help it. and you had betterlearn to channel, learn to control it, or you will not live long
enough to go mad. the one power kills those who cannot control its flow.
how am i supposed to learn? he demanded. moiraine and verin just sat there, unruffled, watching
him.like spiders . how? moiraine claims she cant teach me anything, and i dont know how to learn,
or what. i dont want to, anyway. i want to stop. cant you understand that? to stop!
i told you the truth, rand, moiraine said. she sounded as if they were having a pleasant conversation.
those who could teach you, the male aes sedai, are three thousand years dead. no aes sedai living
can teach you to touchsaidin any more than you could learn to touchsaidar . a bird cannot teach a fish
to fly, nor a fish teach a bird to swim.
i have always thought that was a bad saying, verin said suddenly. there are birds that dive and swim.
and in the sea of storms are fish that fly, with long fins that stretch out as wide as your outstretched
arms, and beaks like swords that can pierce . . . her words trailed off and she became flustered.
moiraine and the amyrlin seat were staring at her without expression.
rand took the interruption to try to regain some control of himself. as tam had taught him long ago, he
formed a single flame in his mind and fed his fears into it, seeking emptiness, the stillness of the void. the
flame seemed to grow until it enveloped everything, until it was too large to contain or imagine any longer.
with that it was gone, leaving in its place a sense of peace. at its edges, emotions still flickered, fear and
anger like black blotches, but the void held. thought skimmed across its surface like pebbles across ice.
the aes sedais attention was only off him for a moment, but when they turned back his face was calm.
why are you talking to me like this, mother? he asked. you should be gentling me.
the amyrlin seat frowned and turned to moiraine. did lan teach him this?
no, mother. he had it from tam althor.
why? rand demanded again.
the amyrlin seat looked him straight in the eye and said, because you are the dragon reborn.
the void rocked. the world rocked. everything seemed to spin around him. he concentrated on
nothing, and the emptiness returned, the world steadied. no, mother. i can channel, the light help me,
but i am not raolin darksbane, nor guaire amalasin, nor yurian stonebow. you can gentle me, or kill
me, or let me go, but i will not be a tame false dragon on a tar valon leash.
he heard verin gasp, and the amyrlins eyes widened, a gaze as hard as blue rock. it did not affect him;
it slid off the void within.
where did you hear those names? the amyrlin demanded. who told you tar valon pulls the lines on
any false dragon?
a friend, mother, he said. a gleeman. his name was thom merrilin. hes dead, now. moiraine
made a sound, and he glanced at her. she claimed thom was not dead, but she had never offered any



proof, and he could not see how any man could survive grappling handtohand with a fade. the thought
was extraneous, and it faded away. there was only the void and the oneness now.
you are not a false dragon, the amyrlin said firmly. you are the true dragon reborn.
i am a shepherd from the two rivers, mother.
daughter, tell him the story. atrue story, boy. listen well.
moiraine began speaking. rand kept his eyes on the amyrlins face, but he heard.
nearly twenty years ago the aiel crossed the spine of the world, the dragonwall, the only time they
have ever done so. they ravaged through cairhien, destroyed every army sent against them, burned the
city of cairhien itself, and fought all the way to tar valon. it was winter and snowing, but cold or heat
mean little to an aiel. the final battle, the last that counted, was fought outside the shining walls, in the
shadow of dragonmount. in three days and three nights of fighting, the aiel were turned back. or rather
they turned back, for they had done what they came to do, which was to kill king laman of cairhien, for
his sin against the tree. it is then that my story begins. and yours.
they came over the dragonwall like a flood. all the way to the shining walls. rand waited for the
memories to fade, but it was tams voice he heard, tam sick and raving, pulling up secrets from his past.
the voice clung outside the void, clamoring to get in.
i was one of the accepted, then, moiraine said, as was our mother, the amyrlin seat. we were
soon to be raised to sisterhood, and that night we stood attendance on the then amyrlin. her keeper of
the chronicles, gitara moroso, was there. every other full sister in tar valon was out healing as many
wounded as she could find, even the reds. it was dawn. the fire on the hearth could not keep the cold
out. the snow had finally stopped, and in the amyrlins chambers in the white tower we could smell the
smoke of outlying villages burned in the fighting.
battles are always hot, even in the snow. had to get away from the stink of death. tams delirious
voice clawed at the empty calm inside rand. the void trembled and shrank, steadied, then wavered
again. the amyrlins eyes bored at him. he felt sweat on his face again. it was all a fever dream, he
said. he was sick. he raised his voice. my name is rand althor. i am a shepherd. my father is tam
althor, and my mother was  
moiraine had paused for him, but now her unchanging voice cut him off, soft and relentless. the
karaethon cycle, the prophecies of the dragon, says that the dragon will be reborn on the slopes of
dragonmount, where he died during the breaking of the world. gitara sedai had the foretelling
sometimes. she was old, her hair as white as the snow outside, but when she had the foretelling, it was
strong. the morning light through the windows was strengthening as i handed her a cup of tea. the
amyrlin seat asked me what news there was from the field of battle. and gitara sedai started up out of
her chair, her arms and legs rigid, trembling, her face as if she looked into the pit of doom at shayol
ghul, and she cried out, he is born again! i feel him! the dragon takes his first breath on the slope of
dragonmount! he is coming! he is coming! light help us! light help the world! he lies in the snow and
cries like the thunder! he burns like the sun! and she fell forward into my arms, dead.
slope of the mountain. heard a baby cry. gave birth there alone, before she died. child blue with
the cold. rand tried to force tams voice away. the void grew smaller. a feverdream, he gasped.i
couldnt leave a child . i was born in the two rivers.always knew you wanted children, kari . he
pulled his eyes away from the amyrlins gaze. he tried to force the void to hold. he knew that was not



the way, but it was collapsing in him.yes, lass. rand is a good name . i  am  rand  althor!
his legs trembled.
and so we knew the dragon was reborn, moiraine went on. the amyrlin swore us to secrecy, we
two, for she knew not all the sisters would see the rebirth as it must be seen. she set us to searching.
there were many fatherless children after that battle. too many. but we found a story, that one man had
found an infant on the mountain. that was all. a man and an infant boy. so we searched on. for years
we searched, finding other clues, poring over the prophecies. he will be of the ancient blood, and raised
by the old blood. that was one; there were others. but there are many places where the old blood,
descended from the age of legends, remains strong. then, in the two rivers, where the old blood of
manetheren seethes still like a river in flood, in emonds field, i found three boys whose namedays were
within weeks of the battle at dragonmount. and one of them can channel. did you think trollocs came
after you just because you aretaveren ? you are the dragon reborn.
rands knees gave way; he dropped to a squat, hands slapping the rug to catch himself from falling on
his face. the void was gone, the stillness shattered. he raised his head, and they were looking at him, the
three aes sedai. their faces were serene, smooth as unruffled ponds, but their eyes did not blink. my
father is tam althor, and i was born . . . they stared at him, unmoving.theyre lying. i am not . . .
what they say! some way, somehow, theyre lying, trying to use me . i will not be used by you.
an anchor is not demeaned by being used to hold a boat, the amyrlin said. you were made for a
purpose, rand althor. when the winds of tarmon gaidon scour the earth, he will face the shadow
and bring forth light again in the world. the prophecies must be fulfilled, or the dark one will break
free and remake the world in his image. the last battle is coming, and you were born to unite mankind
and lead them against the dark one.
baalzamon is dead, rand said hoarsely, and the amyrlin snorted like a stablehand.
if you believe that, you are as much a fool as the domani. many there believe he is dead, or say they
do, but i notice they still wont risk naming him. the dark one lives, and he is breaking free. you will
face the dark one. it is your destiny.
it is your destiny. he had heard that before, in a dream that had maybe not been entirely a dream. he
wondered what the amyrlin would say if she knew baalzamon had spoken to him in dreams.thats
done with. baalzamon is dead. i saw him die.
suddenly it came to him that he was crouching like a toad, huddling under their eyes. he tried to form
the void again, but voices whirled through his head, sweeping away every effort.it is your destiny. babe
lying in the snow. you are the dragon reborn. baalzamon is dead. rand is a good name, kari. i
will not be used! drawing on his own native stubbornness, he forced himself back upright.face it on
your feet. you can keep your pride, at least . the three aes sedai watched with no expression.
what . . . with an effort he steadied his voice. what are you going to do to me?
nothing, the amyrlin said, and he blinked. it was not the answer he had expected, the one he had
feared. you say you want to accompany your friend with ingtar, and you may. i have not marked you
out in any way. some of the sisters may know you aretaveren , but no more. only we three know who
you truly are. your friend perrin will be brought to me, as you were, and i will visit your other friend in
the infirmary. you may go as you will, without fear that we will set the red sisters on you.
who you truly are. anger flared up in him, hot and corrosive. he forced it to stay inside, hidden.



why?
the prophecies must be fulfilled. we let you walk free, knowing what you are, because otherwise the
world we know will die, and the dark one will cover the earth with fire and death. mark me, not all aes
sedai feel the same. there are some here in fal dara who would strike you down if they knew a tenth of
what you are, and feel no more remorse than for gutting a fish. but then, there are men whove no doubt
laughed with you who would do the same, if they knew. have a care, rand althor, dragon reborn.
he looked at each of them in turn.your prophecies are no part of me . they returned his gaze so
calmly it was hard to believe they were trying to convince him he was the most hated, the most feared
man in the history of the world. he had gone right through fear and come out the other side in some place
cold. anger was all that kept him warm. they could gentle him, or burn him to a crisp where he stood,
and he no longer cared.
a part of lans instructions came back to him. left hand on the hilt, he twisted the sword behind him,
catching the scabbard in his right, then bowed, arms straight. by your leave, mother, may i depart this
place?
i give you leave to go, my son.
straightening, he stood there a moment longer. i will not be used, he told them. there was a long
silence as he turned and left.
the silence stretched on in the room after rand left until it was broken by a long breath from the
amyrlin. i cannot make myself like what we just did, she said. it was necessary, but . . . did it work,
daughters?
moiraine shook her head, just the slightest movement. i do not know. but itwas necessary, and is.
necessary, verin agreed. she touched her forehead, then peered at the dampness on her fingers. he
is strong. and as stubborn as you said, moiraine. much stronger than i expected. we may have to gentle
him after all before . . . her eyes widened. but we cannot, can we? the prophecies. the light forgive
us for what we are loosing on the world.
the prophecies, moiraine said, nodding. afterwards, we will do as we must. as we do now.
as we must, the amyrlin said. yes. but when he learns to channel, the light help us all.
the silence returned.

there was a storm coming. nynaeve felt it. a big storm, worse than she had ever seen. she could listen
to the wind, and hear what the weather would be. all wisdoms claimed to be able to do that, though
many could not. nynaeve had felt more comfortable with the ability before learning it was a manifestation
of the power. any woman who could listen to the wind could channel, though most were probably as she
had been, unaware of what she was doing, getting it only in fits and starts.
this time, though, something was wrong. outside, the morning sun was a golden ball in a clear blue sky,
and birds sang in the gardens, but that was not it. there would have been nothing to listening to the wind
if she could not foretell the weather before the signs were visible. there was something wrong with the



feeling this time, something not quite the way it usually was. the storm felt distant, too far off for her to
feel at all. yet it felt as if the sky above should have been pouring down rain, and snow, and hail, all at the
same time, with winds howling to shake the stones of the keep. and she could feel the good weather,
too, lasting for days yet, but that was muted under the other.
a bluefinch perched in an arrowslit like a mockery of her weather sense, peering into the hallway. when
it saw her, it vanished in a flash of blue and white feathers.
she stared at the spot where the bird had been.there is a storm, and there isnt. it means something.
but what?
far down the hall full of women and small children she saw rand striding away, his escort of women half
running to keep up. nynaeve nodded firmly. if there was a storm that was not a storm, he would be the
center of it. gathering her skirts, she hurried after him.
women with whom she had grown friendly since coming to fal dara tried to speak to her; they knew
rand had come with her and that they were both from the two rivers, and they wanted to know why
the amyrlin had summoned him.the amyrlin seat! ice in the pit of her belly, she broke into a run, but
before she left the womens apartments, she had lost him around too many corners and beyond too many
people.
which way did he go? she asked nisura. there was no need to say who. she heard rands name in
the conversation of the other women clustered around the arched doors.
i dont know, nynaeve. he came out as fast as if he had heartsbane himself at his heels. as well he
might, coming here with a sword at his belt. the dark one should be the least of his worries after that.
what is the world coming to? and him presented to the amyrlin in her chambers, no less. tell me,
nynaeve, is he really a prince in your land? the other women stopped talking and leaned closer to
listen.
nynaeve was not sure what she answered. something that made them let her go on. she hurried away
from the womens apartments, head swiveling at every crossing corridor to look for him, fists clenched.
light, what have they done to him? i should have gotten him away from moiraine somehow, the
light blind her. im his wisdom.
are you, a small voice taunted.youve abandoned emonds field to fend for itself. can you still call
yourself their wisdom?
i did not abandon them, she told herself fiercely.i brought mavra mallen up from deven ride to
look after matters till i get back. she can deal well enough with the mayor and the village
council, and she gets on well with the womens circle.
mavra will have to get back to her own village. no village can do without its wisdom for long.
nynaeve cringed inside. she had been gone months from emonds field.
i am the wisdom of emonds field! she said aloud.
a liveried servant carrying a bolt of cloth blinked at her, then bowed low before scurrying off. by his
face he was eager to be anywhere else.
blushing, nynaeve looked around to see if anyone had noticed. there were only a few men in the hall,



engrossed in their own conversations, and some women in blackandgold going about their business,
giving her a bow or curtsy as she passed. she had had that argument with herself a hundred times before,
but this was the first time it had come to talking to herself out loud. she muttered under her breath, then
pressed her lips firmly together when she realized what she was doing.
she was finally beginning to realize her search was futile when she came on lan, his back to her, looking
down on the outer courtyard through an arrowslit. the noise from the courtyard was all horses and men,
neighing and shouting. so intent was lan that he did not, for once, seem to hear her. she hated the fact
that she could never sneak up on him, however softly she stepped. she had been accounted good at
woodscraft back in emonds field, though it was not a skill in which many women took any interest.
she stopped in her tracks, pressing her hands to her stomach to quiet a flutter.i ought to dose myself
with rannel and sheepstongue root , she thought sourly. it was the mixture she gave anyone who
moped about and claimed they were sick, or behaved like a goose. rannel and sheepstongue root would
perk you up a little, and did no harm, but mainly it tasted horrible, and the taste lasted all day. it was a
perfect cure for acting the fool.
safe from his eyes, she studied the length of him, leaning against the stone and fingering his chin as he
studied what was going on below.hes too tall, for one thing, and old enough to be my father, for
another. a man with a face like that would have to be cruel. no, hes not that. never that . and he
was a king. his land was destroyed while he was a child, and he would not claim a crown, but he was a
king, for that.what would a king want with a village woman? hes a warder, too. bonded to
moiraine. she has his loyalty to death, and ties closer than any lover, and she has him. she has
everything i want, the light burn her!
he turned from the arrowslit, and she whirled to go.
nynaeve. his voice caught and held her like a noose. i wanted to speak to you alone. you always
seem to be in the womens apartments, or in company.
it took an effort to face him, but she was sure her features were calm when she looked up at him. im
looking for rand. she was not about to admit to avoiding him. we said all we need to say long ago,
you and i. i shamed myself  which i will not do again  and you told me to go away.
i never said   he took a deep breath. i told you i had nothing to offer for brideprice but widows
clothes. not a gift any man could give a woman. not a man who can call himself a man.
i understand, she said coolly. in any case, a king does not give gifts to village women. and this village
woman would not take them. have you seen rand? i need to talk to him. he was to see the amyrlin. do
you know what she wanted with him?
his eyes blazed like blue ice in the sun. she stiffened her legs to keep from stepping back, and met him
glare for glare.
the dark one take rand althor and the amyrlin seat both, he grated, pressing something into her
hand. i will make you a gift and you will take it if i have to chain it around your neck.
she pulled her eyes away from his. he had a stare like a blueeyed hawk when he was angry. in her
hand was a signet ring, heavy gold and worn with age, almost large enough for both her thumbs to fit
through. on it, a crane flew above a lance and crown, all carefully wrought in detail. her breath caught.
the ring of malkieri kings. forgetting to glare, she lifted her face. i cannot take this, lan.



he shrugged in an offhand way. it is nothing. old, and useless, now. but there are those who would
know it when they saw it. show that, and you will have guestright, and help if you need it, from any lord
in the borderlands. show it to a warder, and he will give aid, or carry a message to me. send it to me,
or a message marked with it, and i will come to you, without delay and without fail. this i swear.
her vision blurred at the edges.if i cry now, i will kill myself . i cant . . . i do not want a gift from
you, allan mandragoran. here, take it.
he fended off her attempts to give the ring back to him. his hand enveloped hers, gentle but firm as a
shackle. then take it for my sake, as a favor to me. or throw it away, if it displeases you. ive no better
use for it. he brushed her cheek with a finger, and she gave a start. i must go now, nynaevemashiara
. the amyrlin wishes to leave before midday, and there is much yet to be done. perhaps we will have
time to talk on the journey to tar valon. he turned and was gone, striding down the hall.
nynaeve touched her cheek. she could still feel where he had touched her.mashiara . beloved of heart
and soul, it meant, but a love lost, too. lost beyond regaining.fool woman! stop acting like a girl with
her hair still not braided. its no use letting him make you feel . . .
clutching the ring tightly, she turned around, and jumped when she found herself facetoface with
moiraine. how long have you been there? she demanded.
not long enough to hear anything i should not have, the aes sedai replied smoothly. wewill be
leaving soon. i heard that. you must see to your packing.
leaving. it had not penetrated when lan said it. i will have to say goodbye to the boys, she muttered,
then gave moiraine a sharp look. what have you done to rand? he was taken to the amyrlin. why?
did you tell her about  about . . . ? she could not say it. he was from her own village, and she was
just enough older than he to have looked after him a time or two when he was little, but she could not
even think about what he had become without her stomach twisting.
the amyrlin will be seeing all three, nynaeve.taveren are not so common that she would miss the
chance to see three together in one place. perhaps she will give them a few words of encouragement,
since they are riding with ingtar to hunt those who stole the horn. they will be leaving about the time we
do, so you had better hurry with any farewells.
nynaeve dashed to the nearest arrowslit and peered down at the outer courtyard. horses were
everywhere, pack animals and saddle horses, and men hurrying about them, calling to each other. the
only clear space was where the amyrlins palanquin stood, its paired horses waiting patiently without any
attendants. some of the warders were out there, looking over their mounts, and on the other side of the
courtyard, ingtar stood with a knot of shienarans around him in armor. sometimes a warder or one of
ingtars men crossed the paving stones to exchange a word:
i should have gotten the boys away from you, she said, still looking out.egwene, too, if i could do it
without killing her. light, why did she have to be born with this cursed ability? i should have
taken them back home.
they are more than old enough to be off apron strings, moiraine said dryly. and you know very well
why you could never do that. for one of them, at least. besides, it would mean leaving egwene to go to
tar valon alone. or have you decided to forgo tar valon yourself? if your own use of the power is not
schooled, you will never be able to use it against me.



nynaeve spun to face the aes sedai, her jaw dropping. she could not help it. i dont know what you
are talking about.
did you think i did not know, child? well, as you wish it. i take it that youare coming to tar valon?
yes, i thought so.
nynaeve wanted to hit her, to knock away the brief smile that flashed across the aes sedais face. aes
sedai had not been able to wield power openly since the breaking, much less the one power, but they
plotted and manipulated, pulled strings like puppetmasters, used thrones and nations like stones on a
stones board. she wants to use me, too, somehow.if a king or a queen, why not a wisdom? just the
way shes using rand, im no child, aes sedai.
what are you doing with rand, now? have you not used him enough? i dont know why you have not
had him gentled, now the amyrlins here with all those other aes sedai, but you must have a reason. it
must be some plot youre hatching. if the amyrlin knew what you were up to, i wager shed  
moiraine cut her off. what possible interest could the amyrlin have in a shepherd? of course, if he
were brought to her attention in the wrong way, he might be gentled, or even killed. he is what he is,
after all. and there is considerable anger about last night. everyone is looking for whom to blame. the
aes sedai fell silent, and let the silence stretch. nynaeve stared at her, grinding her teeth.
yes, moiraine said finally, much better to let a sleeping lion sleep. best you see to your packing,
now. she moved off in the direction lan had gone, seeming to glide across the floor.
grimacing, nynaeve swung her fist back against the wall; the ring dug at her palm. she opened her hand
to look at it. the ring seemed to heat her anger, focus her hate.i willlearn. you think because you
know, you can escape me. but i will learn better than you think, and i will pull you down for what
youve done. for what youve done to mat, and to perrin. for rand, the light help him and the
creator shelter him. especially for rand . her hand closed around the heavy circlet of gold.and for
me.
egwene watched the liveried maid folding her dresses into a leathercovered travel chest, still a little
uncomfortable, even after nearly a months practice, with someone else doing what she could very well
have done herself. they were such beautiful dresses, all gifts from the lady amalisa, just like the gray silk
riding dress she wore, though that was plain except for a few white morningstar blossoms worked on the
breast. many of the dresses were much more elaborate. any one of them would shine at sunday, or at
bel tine. she sighed, remembering that she would be in tar valon for the next sunday, not emonds
field. from the little moiraine had told her of novice training  almost nothing, really  she expected
she might not be home for bel tine, in the spring, or even the sunday after that.
nynaeve put her head into the room. are you ready? she came the rest of the way in. we must be
down in the courtyard soon. she wore a riding dress, too, in blue silk with red loversknots on the
bosom. another gift from amalisa.
nearly, nynaeve. i am almost sorry to be going. i dont suppose well have many chances in tar
valon to wear the nice dresses amalisa gave us. she gave an abrupt laugh. still, wisdom, i wont miss
being able to bathe without looking over my shoulder the whole time.
much better to bathe alone, nynaeve said briskly. her face did not change, but after a moment her
cheeks colored.



egwene smiled.shes thinking about lan . it was still odd to think of nynaeve, the wisdom, mooning
after a man. she did not think it would be wise to put it to nynaeve in quite that way, but of late,
sometimes the wisdom acted as strangely as any girl who had set her heart on a particular man.and one
who doesnt have enough sense to be worthy of her, at that. she loves him, and i can see he loves
her, so why cant he have sense enough to speak up?
i dont think you should call me wisdom any longer, nynaeve said suddenly.
egwene blinked. it was not required, exactly, and nynaeve never insisted on it unless she was angry, or
being formal, but this . . . why ever not?
you are a woman, now. nynaeve glanced at her unbraided hair, and egwene resisted the urge to
hurriedly twist it into a semblance of a braid. aes sedai wore their hair any way they wanted, but wearing
hers loose had become a symbol of starting on a new life. you are a woman, nynaeve repeated firmly.
we are two women, a long way from emonds field, and it will be longer still before we see home
again. it will be better if you simply call me nynaeve.
we will see home again, nynaeve. we will.
dont try to comfort the wisdom, girl, nynaeve said gruffly, but she smiled.
there was a knock at the door, but before egwene could open it, nisura came in, agitation all over her
face. egwene, that young man of yours is trying to come into the womens apartments. she sounded
scandalized. and wearing a sword. just because the amyrlin let him enter that way . . . lord rand
should know better. he is causing an uproar. egwene, you must speak to him.
lord rand, nynaeve snorted. that young man is growing too big for his breeches. when i get my
hands on him, ill lord him.
egwene put a hand on nynaeves arm. let me speak to him, nynaeve. alone.
oh, very well. the best of men are not much better than housebroken. nynaeve paused, and added
half to herself, but then, the best of them are worth the trouble of housebreaking.
egwene shook her head as she followed nisura into the hall. even half a year before, nynaeve would
never have added the second part.but shell never housebreak lan . her thoughts turned to rand.
causing an uproar, was he? housebreak him? she muttered. if he hasnt learned manners by this time,
ill skin him alive.
sometimes that is what it takes, nisura said, walking quickly. men are never more than halfcivilized
until theyre wedded. she gave egwene a sidelong glance. do you intend to marry lord rand? i do
not mean to pry, but you are going to the white tower, and aes sedai seldom wed  none but some of
the green ajah, that ive ever heard, and not many of them  and . . .
egwene could supply the rest. she had heard the talk in the womens apartments about a suitable wife
for rand. at first it had caused stabs of jealousy, and anger. he had been all but promised to her since
they were children. but she was going to be an aes sedai, and he was what he was. a man who could
channel. she could marry him. and watch him go mad, watch him die. the only way to stop it would be
to have him gentled.i cant do that to him. i cant! i do not know, she said sadly.



nisura nodded. no one will poach where you have a claim, but you are going to the tower, and he will
make a good husband. once he has been trained. there he is.
the women gathered around the entrance to the womens apartments, both inside and out, were all
watching three men in the hallway outside. rand, with his sword buckled over his red coat, was being
confronted by agelmar and kajin. neither of them wore a sword; even after what had happened in the
night, these were still the womens apartments. egwene stopped at the back of the crowd.
you understand why you cannot go in, agelmar was saying. i know that things are different in andor,
but you do understand?
i didnt try to go in. rand sounded as if he had explained all this more than once already. i told the
lady nisura i wanted to see egwene, and she said egwene was busy, and id have to wait. all i did
was shout for her from the door. i did not try to enter. youd have thought i was naming the dark one,
the way they all started in on me.
women have their own ways, kajin said. he was tall for a shienaran, almost as tall as rand, lanky
and sallow. his topknot was black as pitch. they set the rules for the womens apartments, and we
abide by them even when they are foolish. a number of eyebrows were raised among the women, and
he hastily cleared his throat. you must send a message in if you wish to speak to one of the women, but
it will be delivered when they choose, and until it is, you must wait. that is our custom.
i have to see her, rand said stubbornly. were leaving soon. not soon enough for me, but i still have
to see egwene. we will get the horn of valere and the dagger back, and that will be the end of it. the
end of it. but i want to see her before i go. egwene frowned; he sounded odd.
no need to be so fierce, kajin said. you and ingtar will find the horn, or not. and if not, then
another will retrieve it. the wheel weaves as the wheel wills, and we are but threads in the pattern.
do not let the horn seize you, rand, agelmar said. it can take hold of a man  i know how it can
 and that is not the way. a man must seek duty, not glory. what will happen, will happen. if the horn
of valere is meant to be sounded for the light, then it will be.
here is your egwene, kajin said, spotting her.
agelmar looked around, and nodded when he saw her with nisura. i will leave you in her hands, rand
althor. remember, here, her words are law, not yours. lady nisura, do not be too hard on him. he
only wished to see his young woman, and he does not know our ways.
egwene followed nisura as the shienaran woman threaded her way through the watching women.
nisura inclined her head briefly to agelmar and kajin; she pointedly did not include rand. her voice was
tight. lord agelmar. lord kajin. he should know this much of our ways by now, but he is too big to
spank, so i will let egwene deal with him.
agelmar gave rand a fatherly pat on the shoulder. you see. you will speak with her, if not exactly in
the way you wished. come, kajin. we have much to see to yet. the amyrlin still insists on . . . his
voice trailed away as he and the other man left. rand stood there, looking at egwene.
the women were still watching, egwene realized. watching her as well as rand. waiting to see what
she would do.so im supposed to deal with him, am i? yet she felt her heart going out to him. his hair
needed brushing. his face showed anger, defiance, and weariness. walk with me, she told him. a



murmur started up behind them as he walked down the hall beside her, away from the womens
apartments. rand seemed to be struggling with himself, hunting for what to say.
ive heard about your . . . exploits, she said finally. running through the womens apartments last
night with a sword. wearing a sword to an audience with the amyrlin seat. he still said nothing, only
walked along frowning at the floor. she didnt . . . hurt you, did she? she could not make herself ask if
he had been gentled; he looked anything but gentle, but she had no idea what a man looked like
afterwards.
he gave a jerk. no. she didnt . . . egwene, the amyrlin . . . he shook his head. she didnt hurt me.
she had the feeling he had been going to say something else entirely. usually she could ferret out
whatever he wanted to hide from her, but when he really wanted to be stubborn, she could more easily
dig a brick out of a wall with her fingernails. by the set of his jaw, he was at his most stubborn right now.
what did she want with you, rand?
nothing important.taveren . she wanted to seetaveren .  his face softened as he looked down at
her. what about you, egwene? are you all right? moiraine said you would be, but you were so still. i
thought you were dead, at first.
well, im not. she laughed. she could not remember anything that had happened after she had asked
mat to go to the dungeons with her, not until waking in her own bed that morning. from what she had
heard of the night, she was almost glad she could not remember. moiraine said she would have left me a
headache for being foolish if she could have healed the rest and not that, but she couldnt.
i told you fain was dangerous, he muttered. i told you, but you wouldnt listen.
if thats the way you are going to talk, she said firmly, i will give you back to nisura. she wont talk
to you the way i am. the last man who tried to push his way into the womens apartments spent a month
up to his elbows in soapy water, helping with the womens laundry, and he was only trying to find his
betrothed and make up an argument. at least he knew enough not to wear his sword. the light knows
what theyd do to you.
everybody wants to do something to me, he growled. everybody wants to use me for something.
well, i wont be used. once we find the horn, and mats dagger, ill never be used again.
with an exasperated grunt, she caught his shoulders and made him face her. she glared up at him. if
you dont start talking sense, rand althor, i swear i will box your ears.
now you sound like nynaeve. he laughed. as he looked down at her, though, his laughter faded. i
suppose  i suppose ill never see you again. i know you have to go to tar valon. i know that. and
youll become an aes sedai. i am done with aes sedai, egwene. i wont be a puppet for them, not for
moiraine, or any of them.
he looked so lost she wanted to put his head on her shoulder, and so stubborn she really did want to
box his ears. listen to me, you great ox. i am going to be an aes sedai, and ill find a way to help you.
i will.
the next time you see me, you will likely want to gentle me.



she looked around hastily; they were alone in their stretch of the hall. if you dont watch your tongue, i
will not be able to help you. do you want everyone to know?
too many know already, he said. egwene, i wish things were different, but they arent. i wish . . .
take care of yourself. and promise me you wont choose the red ajah.
tears blurred her vision as she threw her arms around him. you take care of yourself, she said fiercely
into his chest. if you dont, ill  ill . . . she thought she heard him murmur, i love you, and then he
was firmly unwrapping her arms, gently moving her away from him. he turned and strode away from her,
almost running.
she jumped when nisura touched her arm. he looks as if you set him a task he wont enjoy. but you
mustnt let him see you cry over it. that negates the purpose. come. nynaeve wants you.
scrubbing her cheeks, egwene followed the other woman.take care of yourself, you woolheaded
lummox. light, take care of him.

chapter 9

leavetakings

the outer courtyard was in ordered turmoil when rand finally reached it with his saddlebags and the
bundle containing the harp and flute. the sun climbed toward midday. men hurried around the horses,
tugging at saddle girths and pack harness, voices raised. others darted with lastminute additions to the
packsaddles, or water for the men working, or dashed off to fetch something just remembered. but
everyone seemed to know exactly what they were doing and where they were going. the guardwalks
and archers balconies were crowded again, and excitement crackled in the morning air. hooves
clattered on the paving stones. one of the packhorses began kicking, and stablemen ran to calm it. the
smell of horses hung thick. rands cloak tried to flap in the breeze that rippled the swoopinghawk
banners on the towers, but his bow, slung across his back, held it down.
from outside the open gates came the sounds of the amyrlins pikemen and archers forming up in the
square. they had marched around from a side gate. one of the trumpeters tested his horn.
some of the warders glanced at rand as he walked across the courtyard; a few raised eyebrows when
they saw the heronmark sword, but none spoke. half wore the cloaks that were so queasymaking to
look at. mandarb, lans stallion, was there, tall, and black, and fierceeyed, but the man himself was not,
and none of the aes sedai, none of the women, were in evidence yet either. moiraines white mare,
aldieb, stepped daintily beside the stallion.



rands bay stallion was with the other group on the far side of the courtyard, with ingtar, and a
bannerman holding ingtars gray owl banner, and twenty other armored men with lances tipped with
two feet of steel, all mounted already. the bars of their helmets covered their faces, and golden surcoats
with the black hawk on the chest hid their plateandmail. only ingtars helmet had a crest, a crescent
moon above his brow, points up. rand recognized some of the men. roughtongued uno, with a long
scar down his face and only one eye. ragan and masema. others who had exchanged a word, or played
a game of stones. ragan waved to him, and uno nodded, but masema was not the only one who gave
him a cold stare and turned away. their packhorses stood placidly, tails swishing.
the big bay danced as rand tied his saddlebags and bundle behind the highcantled saddle. he put his
foot in the stirrup and murmured, easy, red, as he swung into the saddle, but he let the stallion frisk
away some of his stablebound energy.
to rands surprise, loial appeared from the direction of the stables, riding to join them. the ogiers
hairyfetlocked mount was as big and heavy as a prime dhurran stallion. beside it, all the other animals
looked the size of bela, but with loial in the saddle, the horse seemed almost a pony.
loial carried no weapon that rand could see; he had never heard of any ogier using a weapon. their
stedding were protection enough. and loial had his own priorities, his own ideas of what was needed
for a journey. the pockets of his long coat had a telltale bulge, and his saddlebags showed the square
imprints of books.
the ogier stopped his horse a little way off and looked at rand, his tufted ears twitching uncertainly.
i didnt know you were coming, rand said. id think you would have had enough of traveling with us.
this time theres no telling how long it will be, or where we will end up.
loials ears lifted a little. there was no telling when i first met you, either. besides, what held then,
holds now. i cant let the chance pass to see history actually weave itself aroundtaveren . and to help
find the horn . . .
mat and perrin rode up behind loial and paused. mat looked a little tired around the eyes, but his face
wore a bloom of health.
mat, rand said, im sorry for what i said. perrin, i didnt mean it. i was being stupid.
mat only glanced at him, then shook his head and mouthed something to perrin that rand could not
hear. mat had only his bow and quiver, but perrin also wore his axe at his belt, with its big halfmoon
blade balanced by a thick spike.
mat? perrin? really, i didnt   they rode on toward ingtar.
that is not a coat for traveling, rand, loial said.
rand glanced down at the golden thorns climbing his crimson sleeve and grimaced.small wonder mat
and perrin still think im putting on airs . on returning to his room he had found everything already
packed and sent on. all of the plain coats he had been given were on the packhorses, so the servants
said; every coat left in the wardrobe was at least as ornate as the one he wore. his saddlebags held
nothing in the way of clothes but a few shirts, some wool stockings, and a spare pair of breeches. at
least he had removed the golden cord from his sleeve, though he had the red eagle pin in his pocket. lan



had meant it for a gift, after all.
ill change when we stop tonight, he muttered. he took a deep breath. loial, i said things to you i
should not have, and i hope youll forgive me. you have every right to hold them against me, but i hope
you wont.
loial grinned, and his ears stood up. he moved his horse closer. i say things i should not all the time.
the elders always said i spoke an hour before i thought.
suddenly lan was at rands stirrup, in his graygreen scaled armor that would make him all but
disappear in forest or darkness. i need to talk to you, sheepherder. he looked at loial. alone, if you
please, builder. loial nodded and moved his big horse away.
i dont know if i should listen to you, rand told the warder. these fancy clothes, and all those things
you told me, they didnt help much.
when you cant win a big victory, sheepherder, learn to settle for the small ones. if you made them
think of you as something more than a farmboy wholl be easy to handle, then you won a small victory.
now be quiet and listen. ive only time for one last lesson, the hardest. sheathing the sword.
youve spent an hour every morning making me do nothing but draw this bloody sword and put it back
in the scabbard. standing, sitting, lying down. i think i can manage to get it back in the sheath without
cutting myself.
i said listen, sheepherder, the warder growled. there will come a time when you must achieve a goal
at all costs. it may come in attack or in defense. and the only way will be to allow the sword to be
sheathed in your own body.
thats crazy, rand said. why would i ever  ?
the warder cut him off. you will know when it comes, sheepherder, when the price is worth the gain,
and there is no other choice left to you. that is called sheathing the sword. remember it.
the amyrlin appeared, striding across the crowded courtyard with leane and her staff, and lord
agelmar at her shoulder. even in a green velvet coat, the lord of fal dara did not look out of place
among so many armored men. there was still no sign of the other aes sedai. as they went by, rand
caught part of their conversation.
but, mother, agelmar was protesting, youve had no time to rest from the journey here. stay at least
a few days more. i promise you a feast tonight such as you could hardly get in tar valon.
the amyrlin shook her head without breaking stride. i cannot, agelmar. you know i would if i could. i
had never planned to remain long, and matters urgently require my presence in the white tower. i should
be there now.
mother, it shames me that you come one day and leave the next. i swear to you, there will be no
repetition of last night. i have tripled the guard on the city gates as well as the keep. i have tumblers in
from the town, and a bard coming from mos shirare. why, king easar will be on his way from fal
moran. i sent word as soon as . . .
their voices faded as they crossed the courtyard, swallowed up by the din of preparation. the amyrlin



never as much as glanced in rands direction.
when rand looked down, the warder was gone, and nowhere to be seen. loial brought his horse back
to rands side. that is a hard man to catch and hold, isnt he, rand? hes not here, then hes here, then
hes gone, and you dont see him coming or going.
sheathing the sword. rand shivered.warders must all be crazy.
the warder the amyrlin was speaking to suddenly sprang into his saddle. he was at a dead gallop
before he reached the widestanding gates. she stood watching him go, and her stance seemed to urge
him to go faster.
where is he headed in such a hurry? rand wondered aloud.
i heard, loial said, that she was sending someone out today, all the way to arad doman. there is
word of some sort of trouble on almoth plain, and the amyrlin seat wants to know exactly what. what i
dont understand is, why now? from what i hear, the rumors of this trouble came from tar valon with
the aes sedai.
rand felt cold. egwenes father had a big map back at home, a map rand had pored over more than
once, dreaming before he found out what the dreams were like when they came true. it was old, that
map, showing some lands and nations the merchants from outside said no longer existed, but almoth
plain was marked, butting against toman head.we will meet again on toman head . it was all the
way across the world he knew, on the aryth ocean. it has nothing to do with us, he whispered.
nothing to do with me.
loial appeared not to have heard. rubbing the side of his nose with a finger like a sausage, the ogier
was still peering at the gate where the warder had vanished. if she wanted to know, why not send
someone before she left tar valon? but you humans are always sudden and excitable, always jumping
around and shouting. his ears stiffened with embarrassment. iam sorry, rand. you see what i mean
about speaking before i think. im rash and excitable sometimes myself, as you know.
rand laughed. it was a weak laugh, but it felt good to have something to laugh at. maybe if we lived as
long as you ogier, wed be more settled. loial was ninety years old; by ogier standards, not old
enough by ten years to be outside thestedding alone. that he had gone anyway was proof, he
maintained, of his rashness. if loial was an excitable ogier, rand thought most of them must be made of
stone.
perhaps so, loial mused, but you humans do so much with your lives. we do nothing but huddle in
ourstedding . planting the groves, and even the building, were all done before the long exile ended. it
was the groves loial held dear, not the cities men remembered the ogier for building. it was the groves,
planted to remind ogier builders of thestedding , that loial had left his home to see. since we found
our way back to thestedding , we . . . his words trailed off as the amyrlin approached.
ingtar and the other men shifted in their saddles, preparing to dismount and kneel, but she motioned
them to stay as they were. leane stood at her shoulder, and agelmar a pace back. from his glum face,
he appeared to have given up trying to convince her to remain longer.
the amyrlin looked at them one by one before she spoke. her gaze stayed on rand no longer than on
any other.



peace favor your sword, lord ingtar, she said finally. glory to the builders, loial kiseran.
you honor us, mother. may peace favor tar valon. ingtar bowed in his saddle, and the other
shienarans did, too.
all honor to tar valon, loial said, bowing.
only rand, and his two friends on the other side of the party, stayed upright. he wondered what she
had said to them. leanes frown took in all three of them, and agelmars eyes widened, but the amyrlin
took no notice.
you ride to find the horn of valere, she said, and the hope of the world rides with you. the horn
cannot be left in the wrong hands, especially in darkfriend hands. those who come to answer its call, will
come whoever blows it, and they are bound to the horn, not to the light.
there was a stir among the listening men. everyone believed that those heroes called back from the
grave would fight for the light. if they could fight for the shadow, instead . . .
the amyrlin went on, but rand was no longer listening. the watcher was back. the hair stirred on the
back of his neck. he peered up at the packed archers balconies overlooking the courtyard, at the rows
of people jammed along the guardwalks atop the walls. somewhere among them was the set of eyes that
had followed him unseen. the gaze clung to him like dirty oil.it cant be a fade, not here. then who?
or what? he twisted in his saddle, pulling red around, searching. the bay began to dance again.
suddenly something flashed across in front of rands face. a man passing behind the amyrlin cried out
and fell, a blackfletched arrow jutting from his side. the amyrlin stood calmly looking at a rent in her
sleeve; blood slowly stained the gray silk.
a woman screamed, and abruptly the courtyard rang with cries and shouts. the people on the walls
milled furiously, and every man in the courtyard had his sword out. even rand, he was surprised to
realize.
agelmar shook his blade at the sky. find him! he roared. bring him to me! his face went from red
to white when he saw the blood on the amyrlins sleeve. he fell to his knees, head bowed. forgive,
mother. i have failed your safety. i am ashamed.
nonsense, agelmar, the amyrlin said. leane, stop fussing over me and see to that man. ive cut
myself worse than this more than once cleaning fish, and he needs help now. agelmar, stand up. stand
up, lord of fal dara. you have not failed me, and you have no reason for shame. last year in the white
tower, with my own guards at every gate and warders all around me, a man with a knife came within
five steps of me. a whitecloak, no doubt, though ive no proof. please stand up, or i will be shamed.
as agelmar slowly rose, she fingered her sliced sleeve. a poor shot for a whitecloak bowman, or even
a darkfriend. her eyes flickered up to touch rands. if it was at me he aimed. her gaze was gone
before he could read anything on her face, but he suddenly wanted to dismount and hide.
it wasnt aimed at her, and she knows it.
leane straightened from where she had been kneeling. someone had laid a cloak over the face of the
man who had taken the arrow. he is dead, mother. she sounded tired. he was dead when he struck
the ground. even if i had been at his side . . .



you did what you could, daughter. death cannot be healed.
agelmar moved closer. mother, if there are whitecloak killers about, or darkfriends, you must allow
me to send men with you. as far as the river, at least. i could not live if harm came to you in shienar.
please, return to the womens apartments. i will see them guarded with my life until you are ready to
travel.
be at ease, she told him. this scratch will not delay me a moment. yes, yes, i will gladly accept your
men as far as the river, if you insist. but i will not let this delay lord ingtar a moment, either. every
heartbeat counts until the horn is found again. your leave, lord agelmar, to order your oathmen?
he bowed his head in assent. at that moment he would have given her fal dara had she asked.
the amyrlin turned back to ingtar and the men gathered behind him. she did not look at rand again. he
was surprised to see her smile suddenly.
i wager illian does not give its great hunt of the horn so rousing a sendoff, she said. but yours is
the true great hunt. you are few, so you may travel quickly, yet enough to do what you must. i charge
you, lord ingtar of house shinowa, i charge all of you, find the horn of valere, and let nothing bar your
way.
ingtar whipped his sword from his back and kissed the blade. by my life and soul, by my house and
honor, i swear it, mother.
then ride.
ingtar swung his horse toward the gate.
rand dug his heels into reds flanks and galloped after the column already disappearing through the
gates.
unaware of what had occurred within, the amyrlins pikemen and archers stood walling a path from the
gates to the city proper, the flame of tar valon on their chests. her drummers and trumpeters waited
near the gates, ready to fall in when she left. behind the rows of armored men, people packed the square
in front of the keep. some cheered ingtars banner, and others no doubt thought this was the start of the
amyrlin seats departure. a swelling roar followed rand across the square.
he caught up with ingtar where loweaved houses and shops stood to either side, and more people
thickly lined the stonepaved street. some of them cheered, too. mat and perrin had been riding at the
head of the column with ingtar and loial, but the two of them fell back when rand joined them.how am
i ever going to apologize if they wont stay near me long enough for me to say anything? burn me,
he doesnt looklike hes dying.
changu and nidao are gone, ingtar said abruptly. he sounded cold and angry, but shaken, too. we
counted every head in the keep, alive or dead, last night and again this morning. they are the only ones
not accounted for.
changu was on guard in the dungeon yesterday, rand said slowly.
and nidao. they had the second watch. they always stayed together, even if they had to trade or do
extra duty for it. they were not on guard when it happened, but . . . they fought at tarwins gap, a



month gone, and saved lord agelmar when his horse went down with trollocs all around him. now this.
darkfriends. he drew a deep breath. everything is breaking apart.
a man on horseback forced his way through the throng lining the street and joined in behind ingtar. he
was a townsman, by his clothes, lean, with a lined face and graying hair cut long. a bundle and
waterbottles were lashed behind his saddle, and a shortbladed sword and a notched swordbreaker
hung at his belt, along with a cudgel.
ingtar noticed rands glances. this is hurin, our sniffer. there was no need to let the aes sedai know
about him. not that what he does is wrong, you understand. the king keeps a sniffer in fal moran, and
theres another in ankor dail. its just that aes sedai seldom like what they do not understand, and with
him being a man . . . its nothing to do with the power, of course. aaaah! you tell him, hurin.
yes, lord ingtar, the man said. he bowed low to rand from his saddle. honor to serve, my lord.
call me rand. rand stuck out his hand, and after a moment hurin grinned and took it.
as you wish, my lord rand. lord ingtar and lord kajin dont mind a mans ways  and lord
agelmar, of course  but they say in the town youre an outland prince from the south, and some
outland lords are strict for every man in his place.
im not a lord.at least ill get away from that, now . just rand.
hurin blinked. as you wish, my lor  ah  rand. im a sniffer, you see. been one four years this
sunday. i never heard of such a thing before then, but i hear theres a few others like me. it started slow,
catching bad smells where nobody else smelled anything, and it grew. took a whole year before i
realized what it was. i could smell violence, the killing and the hurting. smell where it happened. smell the
trail of those who did it. every trails different, so theres no chance of mixing them up. lord ingtar heard
of it, and took me in his service, to serve the kings justice.
you can smell violence? rand said. he could not help looking at the mans nose. it was an ordinary
nose, not large, not small. you mean you can really follow somebody who, say, killed another man? by
smell?
i can that, my lor  ah  rand. it fades with time, but the worse the violence, the longer it lasts.
aiie, i can smell a battlefield ten years old, though the trails of the men who were there are gone. up near
the blight, the trails of the trollocs almost never fade. not much to a trolloc but killing and hurting. a
fight in a tavern, though, with maybe a broken arm . . . that smells gone in hours.
i can see where you wouldnt want aes sedai to find out.
ah, lord ingtar was right about the aes sedai, the light illumine themahrand. there was one in
cairhien once  brown ajah, but i swear i thought she was red before she let me go  she kept me a
month trying to find out how i do it. she didnt like not knowing. she kept muttering, is it old come
again, or new? and staring at me until you would have thought i was using the one power. almost had
me doubting myself. but i havent gone mad, and i dontdo anything. i just smell it.
rand could not help remembering moiraine.old barriers weaken. there is something of dissolution
and change about our time. old things walk again, and new things are born. we may live to see
the end of an age . he shivered. so well track those who took the horn with your nose.



ingtar nodded. hurin grinned proudly, and said, we will that  ah  rand. i followed a murderer to
cairhien, once, and another all the way to maradon, to bring them back for the kings justice. his grin
faded, and he looked troubled. this is the worst ever, though. murder smells bad, and the trail of a
murderer stinks with it, but this . . . his nose wrinkled. there were men in it last night. darkfriends,
must be, but you cant tell a darkfriend by smell. what ill follow is the trollocs, and the halfmen. and
something even worse. he trailed off, frowning and muttering to himself, but rand could hear it.
something even worse, the light help me.
they reached the city gates, and just beyond the walls hurin lifted his face to the breeze. his nostrils
flared, then he gave a snort of disgust. that way, my lord ingtar. he pointed south.
ingtar looked surprised. not toward the blight?
no, lord ingtar. faugh! hurin wiped his mouth on his sleeve. i can almost taste them. south, they
went.
she was right, then, the amyrlin seat, ingtar said slowly. a great and wise woman, who deserves
better than me to serve her. take the trail, hurin.
rand turned and peered back through the gates, up the street to the keep. he hoped egwene was all
right.nynaeve will look after her. maybe its better this way, like a clean cut, too quick to hurt till
after its done.
he rode after ingtar and the gray owl banner, south. the wind was making up, and cold against his
back despite the sun. he thought he heard laughter in it, faint and mocking.

the waxing moon lit the humid, nightdark streets of illian, which still rang with celebration left over from
daylight. in only a few more days, the great hunt of the horn would be sent forth with pomp and
ceremony that tradition claimed dated to the age of legends. the festivities for the hunters had blended
into the feast of teven, with its famed contests and prizes for gleemen. the greatest prize of all, as
always, would go for the best telling ofthe great hunt of the horn.
tonight the gleemen entertained in the palaces and mansions of the city, where the great and mighty
disported themselves, and the hunters come from every nation to ride out and find, if not the horn of
valere itself, at least immortality in song and story. they would have music and dancing, and fans and
ices to dispel the years first real heat, but carnival filled the streets, too, in the moonbright muggy night.
every day was a carnival, until the hunt departed, and every night.
people ran past bayle domon in masks and costumes bizarre and fanciful, many showing too much
flesh. shouting and singing they ran, a half dozen together, then scattered pairs giggling and clutching each
other, then twenty in a raucous knot. fireworks crackled in the sky, gold and silver bursts against the
black. there were almost as many illuminators in the city as there were gleemen.
domon spared little thought for fireworks, or for the hunt. he was on his way to meet men he thought
might be trying to kill him.
he crossed the bridge of flowers, over one of the citys many canals, into the perfumed quarter, the
port district of illian. the canal smelled of too many chamber pots, with never a sign that there had ever
been flowers near the bridge. the quarter smelled of hemp and pitch from the shipyards and docks, and



sour harbor mud, all of it made fiercer by heated air that seemed nearly damp enough to drink. domon
breathed heavily; every time he returned from the northcountry he found himself surprised, for all he had
been born there, at the early summer heat in illian.
in one hand he carried a stout cudgel, and the other hand rested on the hilt of the short sword he had
often used in defending the decks of his river trader from brigands. no few footpads stalked these nights
of revelry, where the pickings were rich and most were deep in wine.
yet he was a broad, muscular man, and none of those out for a catch of gold thought him rich enough, in
his plaincut coat, to risk his size and his cudgel. the few who caught a clear glimpse of him, when he
passed through light spilling from a window, edged back till he was well past. dark hair that hung to his
shoulders and a long beard that left his upper lip bare framed a round face, but that face had never been
soft, and now it was set as grimly as if he meant to batter his way through a wall. he had men to meet,
and he was not happy about it.
more revelers ran past singing offkey, wine mangling their words.the horn of valere, my aged
grandmother! domon thought glumly.it be my ship i do want to hang on to. and my life, fortune
prick me.
he pushed into an inn, under a sign of a big, whitestriped badger dancing on its hind legs with a man
carrying a silver shovel. easing the badger, it was called, though not even nieda sidoro, the innkeeper,
knew what the name meant; there had always been an inn of the name in illian.
the common room, with sawdust on the floor and a musician softly strumming a twelvestringed bittern
in one of the sea folks sad songs, was well lighted and quiet. nieda allowed no commotion in her
place, and her nephew, bili, was big enough to carry a man out with either hand. sailors, dockworkers,
and warehousemen came to the badger for a drink and maybe a little talk, for a game of stones or darts.
the room was half full now; even men who liked quiet had been lured out by carnival. the talk was soft,
but domon caught mentions of the hunt, and of the false dragon the murandians had taken, and of the
one the tarens were chasing through haddon mirk. there seemed to be some question whether it would
be preferable to see the false dragon die, or the tairens.
domon grimaced.false dragons! fortune prick me, there be no place safe these days . but he had
no real care for false dragons, any more than for the hunt.
the stout proprietress, with her hair rolled at the back of her head, was wiping a mug, keeping a sharp
eye on her establishment. she did not stop what she was doing, or even look at him, really, but, her left
eyelid drooped, and her eyes slanted toward three men at a table in the corner. they were quiet even for
the badger, almost somber, and their bellshaped velvet caps and dark coats, embroidered across the
chest in bars of silver and scarlet and gold, stood out among the plain dress of the other patrons.
domon sighed and took a table in a corner by himself.cairhienin, this time . he took a mug of brown
ale from a serving girl and drew a long swallow. when he lowered the mug, the three men in striped
coats were standing beside his table. he made an unobtrusive gesture, to let nieda know that he did not
need bili.
captain domon? they were all three nondescript, but there was an air about the speaker that made
domon take him for their leader. they did not appear to be armed; despite their fine clothes, they looked
as if they did not need to be. there were hard eyes in those so very ordinary faces. captain bayle
domon, of thespray ?



domon gave a short nod, and the three sat down without waiting for an invitation. the same man did the
talking; the other two just watched, hardly blinking.guards , domon thought,for all their fine clothes.
who do he be to have a pair of guards to look over him?
captain domon, we have a personage who must be brought from mayene to illian.
spraybe a river craft, domon cut him off. her draft be shallow, and she has no the keel for deep
water. it was not exactly true, but close enough for landsmen.at least it be a change from tear. they
be getting smarter.
the man seemed unperturbed at the interruption. we had heard you were giving up the river trade.
maybe i do, and maybe no. i have no decided. he had, though. he would not go back upriver, back
to the borderlands, for all the silk shipped in tairen bottoms. saldaean furs and ice peppers were not
worth it, and it had nothing to do with the false dragon he had heard of there. but he wondered again
how anyone knew. he had not spoken of it to anyone, yet the others had known, too.
you can coast to mayene easily enough. surely, captain, you would be willing to sail along the
shoreline for a thousand gold marks.
despite himself, domon goggled. it was four times the last offer, and that had been enough to make a
mans jaw drop. who do you want me to fetch for that? the first of mayene herself? has tear finally
forced her all the way out, then?
you need no names, captain. the man set a large leather pouch on the table, and a sealed parchment.
the pouch clinked heavily as he pushed them across the table. the big red wax circle holding the folded
parchment shut bore the manyrayed rising sun of cairhien. two hundred on account. for a thousand
marks, i think you need no names. give that, seal unbroken, to the port captain of mayene, and he will
give you three hundred more, and your passenger. i will hand over the remainder when your passenger is
delivered here. so long as you have made no effort to discover that personages identity.
domon drew a deep breath.fortune, it be worth the voyage if there be never another penny
beyond what be in that sack . and a thousand was more money than he would clear in three years. he
suspected that if he probed a little more, there would be other hints, just hints, that the voyage involved
hidden dealings between illians council of nine and the first of mayene. the firsts citystate was a
province of tear in all but name, and she would no doubt like illians aid. and there were many in illian
who said it was time for another war, that tear was taking more than a fair share of the trade on the sea
of storms. a likely net to snare him, if he had not seen three like it in the past month.
he reached to take the pouch, and the man who had done all the talking caught his wrist. domon glared
at him, but he looked back undisturbed.
you must sail as soon as possible, captain.
at first light, domon growled, and the man nodded and released his hold.
at first light, then, captain domon. remember, discretion keeps a man alive to spend his money.
domon watched the three of them leave, then stared sourly at the pouch and the parchment on the table
in front of him. someone wanted him to go east. tear or mayene, it did not matter so long as he went
east. he thought he knew who wanted it.and then again, i have no a clue to them . who could know



who was a darkfriend? but he knew that darkfriends had been after him since before he left marabon to
come back downriver. darkfriends and trollocs. of that, he was sure. the real question, the one he had
not even a glimmer of an answer for, was why?
trouble, bayle? nieda asked. you do look as if you had seen a trolloc. she giggled, an improbable
sound from a woman her size. like most people who had never been to the borderlands, nieda did not
believe in trollocs. he had tried telling her the truth of it; she enjoyed his stories, and thought they were
all lies. she did not believe in snow, either.
no trouble, nieda. he untied the pouch, dug a coin out without looking, and tossed it to her. drinks
for everyone till that do run out, then ill give you another.
nieda looked at the coin in surprise. a tar valon mark! do you be trading with the witches now,
bayle?
no, he said hoarsely. that i do not!
she bit the coin, then quickly snugged it away behind her broad belt. well, it be gold for that. and i
suspect the witches be no so bad as some make them out, anyway. id no say so much to many men. i
know a money changer who do handle such. youll no have to give me another, with as few as be here
tonight. more ale for you, bayle?
he nodded numbly, though his mug was still almost full, and she trundled off. she was a friend, and
would not speak of what she had seen. he sat staring at the leather pouch. another mug was brought
before he could make himself open it enough to look at the coins inside. he stirred them with a callused
finger. gold marks glittered up at him in the lamplight, every one of them bearing the damning flame of
tar valon. hurriedly he tied the bag. dangerous coins. one or two might pass, but so many would say
to most people exactly what nieda thought. there were children of the light in the city, and although
there was no law in illian against dealing with aes sedai, he would never make it to a magistrate if the
whitecloaks heard of this. these men had made sure he would not simply take the gold and stay in illian.
while he was sitting there worrying, yarin maeldan, his brooding, storklike second onspray , came
into the badger with his brows pulled down to his long nose and stood over the captains table. carns
dead, captain.
domon stared at him, frowning. three others of his men had already been killed, one each time he
refused a commission that would take him east. the magistrates had done nothing; the streets were
dangerous at night, they said, and sailors a rough and quarrelsome lot. magistrates seldom troubled
themselves with what happened in the perfumed quarter, as long as no respectable citizens were injured.
but this time i did accept them, he muttered.
tisnt all, captain, yarin said. they worked carn with knives, like they wanted him to tell them
something. and some more men tried to sneak aboardspray not an hour gone. the dock watch ran them
off. third time in ten days, and i never knew wharf rats to be so persistent. they like to let an alarm die
down before they try again. and somebody tossed my room at the silver dolphin last night. took some
silver, so id think it was thieves, but they left that belt buckle of mine, the one set with garnets and
moonstones, lying right out in plain sight. whats going on, captain? the men are afraid, and im a little
nervous myself.
domon reared to his feet. roust the crew, yarin. find them and tell themspray sails as soon as there



do be men enough aboard to handle her. stuffing the parchment into his coat pocket, he snatched up the
bag of gold and pushed his second out the door ahead of him. roust them, yarin, for ill leave any man
who no makes it, standing on the quay as he is.
domon gave yarin a shove to start him running, then stalked off toward the docks. even footpads who
heard the clinking of the pouch he carried steered clear of him, for he walked now like a man going to do
murder.
there were already crewmen scrambling aboardspray when he arrived, and more running barefoot
down the stone quay. they did not know what he feared was pursuing him, or even that anything did
pursue him, but they knew he made good profits, and after the illianer way, he gave shares to the crew.
spraywas eighty feet long, with two masts, and broad in the beam, with room for deck cargo as well as
in the holds. despite what domon had told the cairhienin  if they had been cairhienin  he thought
she could stand the open water. the sea of storms was quieter in the summer.
shell have to, he muttered, and strode below to his cabin.
he tossed the sack of gold on his bed, built neatly against the hull like everything else in the stern cabin,
and dug out the parchment. lighting a lantern, hanging in its swivel from the overhead, he studied the
sealed document, turning it as if he could read what was inside without opening it. a rap on the door
made him frown.
come.
yarin stuck his head in. theyre all aboard but three i couldnt find, captain. but ive spread the word
through every tavern, hell, and crib in the quarter. theyll be aboard before its light enough to start
upriver.
spraydo sail now. to sea. domon cut off yarins protests about light and tides, andspray not being
built for the open sea. now!spray can clear the bars at dead low tide. youve no forgotten how to sail
by the stars, have you? take her out, yarin. take her out now, and come back to me when we be
beyond the breakwater.
his second hesitated  domon never let a tricky bit of sailing pass without him on deck giving orders,
and takingspray out in the night would be all of that, shallow draft or no  then nodded and vanished. in
moments the sounds of yarin shouting orders and bare feet thumping on the decks overhead penetrated
domons cabin. he ignored them, even when the ship lurched, catching the tide.
finally he lifted the mantle of the lantern and stuck a knife into the flame. smoke curled up as oil burned
off the blade, but before the metal could turn red, he pushed charts out of the way and pressed the
parchment flat on his desk, working the hot steel slowly under the sealing wax. the top fold lifted.
it was a simple document, without preamble or salutation, and it made sweat break out on his forehead.

the bearer of this is a darkfriend wanted in cairhien for murders and other foul crimes, least
among them, theft from our person. we call upon you to seize this man and all things found in his
keeping, to the smallest. our representative will come to carry away what he has stolen from us.
let all he possesses, save what we claim, go to you at reward for taking him. let the vile



miscreant himself be hanged immediately, that his shadowspawned villainy no longer taint the
light.
sealed by our hand
galldrian su riatin rie
king of cairhien
defender of the dragonwall

in thin red wax below the signature were impressed the rising sun seal of cairhien and the five stars of
house riatin.
defender of the dragonwall, my aged grandmother, domon croaked. fine right the man do have to
call himself that any longer.
he examined the seals and signature minutely, holding the document close to the lamp, with his nose all
but brushing the parchment, but he could find no flaw in the one, and for the other, he had no idea what
galldrians hand looked like. if it was not the king himself who had signed it, he suspected that whoever
had had made a good imitation of galldrians scrawl. in any case, it made no real difference. in tear, the
letter would be instantly damning in the hands of an illianer. or in mayene, with tairen influence so
strong. there was no war now, and men from either port came and went freely, but there was as little
love for illianers in tear as the other way round. especially with an excuse like this.
for a moment he thought of putting the parchment into the lanterns flame  it was a dangerous thing to
have, in tear or illian or anywhere he could imagine  but finally he tucked it carefully into a secret
cubbyhole behind his desk, concealed by a panel only he knew how to open.
my possessions, eh?
he collected old things, as much as he could living on shipboard. what he could not buy, because it was
too expensive or too large, he collected by seeing and remembering. all those remnants of times gone,
those wonders scattered around the world that had first pulled him aboard a ship as boy. he had added
four to his collection in maradon this last trip, and it had been then that the darkfriend pursuit began. and
trollocs, too, for a time. he had heard that whitebridge had been burned to the ground right after he
sailed from there, and there had been rumors of myrddraal as well as trollocs. it was that, all of it
together, that had first convinced him he was not imagining things, that had had him on guard when that
first odd commission was offered, too much money for a simple voyage to tear, and a thin tale for a
reason.
digging into his chest, he set out on the desk what he had bought in maradon. a lightstick, left from the
age of legends, or so it was said. certainly no one knew the making of them any longer. expensive,
that, and rarer than an honest magistrate. it looked like a plain glass rod, thicker than his thumb and not
quite as long as his forearm, but when held in the hand it glowed as brightly as a lantern. lightsticks
shattered like glass, too; he had nearly lostspray in the fire caused by the first he had owned. a small,
agedark ivory carving of a man holding a sword. the fellow who sold it claimed if you held it long
enough you started to feel warm. domon never had, and neither had any of the crew he let hold it, but it
was old, and that was enough for domon. the skull of a cat as big as a lion, and so old it was turned to
stone. but no lion had ever had fangs, almost tusks, a foot long. and a thick disk the size of a mans
hand, half white and half black, a sinuous line separating the colors. the shopkeeper in maradon had said
it was from the age of legends, thinking he lied, but domon had haggled only a little before paying,



because he recognized what the shopkeeper did not: the ancient symbol of aes sedai from before the
breaking of the world. not a safe thing to have, precisely, but neither a thing to be passed up by a man
with a fascination for the old.
and it was heartstone. the shopkeeper had never dared add that to what he thought were lies. no
riverfront shopkeeper in maradon could afford even one piece ofcuendillar.
the disk felt hard and smooth in his hand, and not at all valuable except for its age, but he was afraid it
was what his pursuers were after. lightsticks, and ivory carvings, and even bones turned to stone, he had
seen other times, other places. yet even knowing what they wanted  if he did know  he still had no
idea why, and he could no longer be sure who his pursuers were. tar valon marks, and an ancient aes
sedai symbol. he scrubbed a hand across his lips; the taste of fear lay bitter on his tongue.
a knock at the door. he set the disk down and pulled an unrolled chart over what lay on his desk.
come.
yarin entered. were beyond the breakwater, captain.
domon felt a flash of surprise, then anger with himself. he should never have gotten so engrossed that he
failed to feelspray lifting on the swells. make west, yarin. see to it.
ebou dar, captain?
no far enough. no by five hundred leagues. well put in long enough for me to get charts and top
the water barrels, then we do sail west.
west, captain? tremalking? the sea folk are tight with any traders but their own.
the aryth ocean, yarin. plenty of trade between tarabon and arad doman, and hardly a taraboner
or domani bottom to worry about. they do no like the sea, i have heard. and all those small towns on
toman head, every one holding itself free of any nation at all. we can even pick up saldaean furs and
ice peppers brought down to bandar eban.
yarin shook his head slowly. he always looked at the dark side, but he was a good sailor. furs and
peppersll cost more there than running upriver for them, captain. and i hear theres some kind of war.
if tarabon and arad doman are fighting, there may be no trade. i doubt well make much off the towns
on toman head alone, even if they are safe. falmes the largest, and it is not big.
the taraboners and the domani have always squabbled over almoth plain and toman head. even if it
has come to blows this time, a careful man can always find trade. west, yarin.
when yarin had gone topside, domon quickly added the blackandwhite disk to the cubbyhole, and
stowed the rest back in the bottom of his chest.darkfriends or aes sedai, ill no run the way they
want me. fortune prick me, ill no.
feeling safe for the first time in months, domon went on deck asspray heeled to catch the wind and put
her bow west into the nightdark sea.



chapter 10

the hunt begins

ingtar set a fast pace for the beginning of along journey, fast enough that rand worried a little about the
horses. the animals could keep up the trot for hours, but there was still most of the day ahead, and likely
days more beyond that. the way ingtars face was set, though, rand thought he might intend to catch
those who had stolen the horn in the first day, in the first hour. remembering his voice when he swore his
oath to the amyrlin seat, rand would not have been surprised. he kept his mouth shut, though. it was
lord ingtars command; as friendly as he had been to rand, he still would not appreciate a shepherd
giving advice.
hurin rode a pace behind ingtar, but it was the sniffer who led them south, pointing the way for ingtar.
the land was rolling, forested hills, thick with fir and leatherleaf and oak, but the path hurin set led almost
straight as an arrow, never wavering except to go around a few of the taller hills, where the way was
clearly quicker around than over. the gray owl banner rippled in the wind.
rand tried to ride with mat and perrin, but when rand let his horse drop back to them, mat nudged
perrin, and perrin reluctantly galloped to the head of the column with mat. telling himself there was no
point riding at the back by himself, rand rode back to the front. they fell to the rear again, mat again
urging perrin.
burn them. i only want to apologize. he felt alone. it did not help that he knew it was his own fault.
atop one hill, uno dismounted to examine ground churned by hooves. he poked at some horse
droppings and grunted. bloody well moving fast, my lord. he had a voice that sounded as if he were
shouting when he was just speaking. weve not made up an hour on them. burn me, we may have lost a
flaming hour. theyll kill their bloody horses, the way theyre going. he fingered a hoofed track. no
horse, that. bloody trolloc. some flaming goat feet over there.
we will catch them, ingtar said grimly.
our horses, my lord. does no good to ride them into the bloody ground before we do catch up, my
lord. even if they do kill their horses, bloody trollocs can keep going longer than horses.
we will catch them. mount, uno.
uno looked at rand with his one eye, then shrugged and climbed into his saddle. ingtar took them down
the far slope at a run, half sliding all the way to the bottom, and galloped up the next.
why did he look at me that way, rand wondered. uno was one of those who had never shown much
friendliness toward him. it was not like masemas open dislike; uno was not friendly with anyone except



a few veterans as grizzled as himself.surely hedoesnt believe that tale about me being a lord.
uno spent his time studying the country ahead, but when he caught rand looking at him, he gave back
stare for stare, and never said a word. it did not mean much. he would stare ingtar in the eye, too. that
was unos way.
the path chosen by the darkfriends and what else , rand wondered; hurin kept muttering about
something worse  who had stolen the horn never came close to any village. rand saw villages, from
one hilltop to another, with a mile or more of upanddown country between, but there was never one
close enough to make out the people in the streets. or close enough for those people to make out a party
heading south. there were farms, too, with loweaved houses and tall barns and smoking chimneys, on
hilltops and on hillsides and in the bottoms, but never one close enough for the farmer to have seen their
quarry.
eventually even ingtar had to realize that the horses could not keep on as they were going. rand heard
muttered curses, and ingtar pounded his thigh with a gauntleted fist, but finally he ordered everyone to
dismount. they trotted, leading their horses, uphill and down, for a mile, then mounted and rode again.
then it was down again and trot. trot a mile, then ride a mile. trot, then ride.
rand was surprised to see loial grinning when they were down on the ground, toiling up a hill. the
ogier had been uneasy about riding and horses when they first met, preferring to trust to his own feet, but
rand thought he had long gotten over that.
do you like to run, rand? loial laughed. i do. i was the fastest in stedding shangtai. i outran a
horse, once.
rand only shook his head. he did not want to waste breath on talk. he looked for mat and perrin, but
they were still at the back, too many men between for rand to make them out. he wondered how the
shienarans could manage this in their armor. not a one of them slowed or voiced a complaint. uno did
not even look as if he were breaking a sweat, and the bannerman never let the gray owl waver.
it was a quick pace, but twilight began to close without any sight of those they hunted except their
tracks. at last, reluctantly, ingtar called a halt to make camp for the night in the forest. the shienarans
went about getting fires started and setting picketlines for the horses with a smooth economy of effort
born of long experience. ingtar posted six guards, in pairs, for the first watch.
rands first order of business was finding his bundle in the wicker panniers from the packhorses. it was
not hard  there were few personal bundles among the supplies  but when he had it open, he let out a
shout that brought every man in the camp erect with sword in hand.
ingtar came running. what is it? peace, did someone get through? i did not hear the guards.
its these coats, rand growled, still staring at what he had unpacked. one coat was black,
embroidered with silver thread, the other white worked in gold. both had herons on the collars, and both
were at least as ornate as the scarlet coat he was wearing. the servants told me i had two good,
serviceable coats in here. look at them!
ingtar sheathed his sword over his shoulder. the other men began to settle back down. well, they are
serviceable.
i cant wear these. i cant go around dressed like this all the time.



you can wear them. a coats a coat. i understand moiraine sedai herself saw to your packing. maybe
aes sedai do not exactly understand what a man wears in the field. ingtar grinned. after we catch
these trollocs, perhaps well have a feast. you will be dressed for it, at least, even if the rest of us are
not. he strolled back to where the cook fires were already burning.
rand had not moved since ingtar mentioned moiraine. he stared at the coats.what is she doing?
whatever it is, i will not be used . he bundled everything together again and stuffed the bundle back
into the pannier.i can always go naked , he thought bitterly.
shienarans took turns at the cooking when they were in the field, and masema was stirring the kettle
when rand returned to the fires. the smell of a stew made from turnips, onions, and dried meat settled
over the camp. ingtar was served first, and then uno, but everyone else stood in line however they
happened to come. masema slopped a big ladle of stew on rands plate; rand stepped back quickly to
keep from getting the overflow on his coat, and made room for the next man while sucking a burned
thumb. masema stared at him, with a fixed grin that never reached his eyes. until uno stepped up and
cuffed him.
we didnt bloody bring enough for you to be spilling it on the flaming ground. the oneeyed man
looked at rand and left. masema rubbed his ear, but his glare followed rand.
rand went to join ingtar and loial, sitting on the ground under a spreading oak. ingtar had his helmet
off, on the ground beside him, but otherwise he was fully armored. mat and perrin were already there,
eating hungrily. mat gave a broad sneer at rands coat, but perrin barely looked up, golden eyes shining
in the halflight from the fires, before bending back to his plate.
at least they didnt leave this time.
he sat crosslegged on the other side of ingtar from them. i wish i knew why uno keeps looking at
me. its probably this bloody coat.
ingtar paused thoughtfully around a mouthful of stew. finally he said, uno no doubt wonders if you are
worthy of a heronmark blade. mat snorted loudly, but ingtar went on unperturbed. do not let uno
upset you. he would treat lord agelmar like a raw recruit if he could. well, perhaps not agelmar, but
anyone else. he has a tongue like a file, but he gives good advice. he should; hes been campaigning
since before i was born. listen to his advice, dont mind his tongue, and you will do all right with uno.
i thought he was like masema. rand shoveled stew into his mouth. it was too hot, but he gulped it
down. they had not eaten since leaving fal dara, and he had been too worried to eat that morning. his
stomach rumbled, reminding him it was past time. he wondered if telling masema he liked the food
would help. masema acts like he hates me, and i dont understand it.
masema served three years in the eastern marches, ingtar said. at ankor dail, against the aiel. he
stirred his stew with his spoon, frowning. i ask no questions, mind. if lan dai shan and moiraine sedai
want to say you are from andor, from the two rivers, then you are. but masema cant get the look of
the aiel out of his head, and when he sees you . . . he shrugged. i ask no questions.
rand dropped his spoon in the plate with a sigh. everybody thinks im somebody i am not. i am from
the two rivers, ingtar. i grew tabac with  with my father, and tended his sheep. that is what i am. a
farmer and shepherd from the two rivers.



hes from the two rivers, mat said scornfully. i grew up with him, though youd never know it now.
you put this aiel nonsense in his head on top of whats already there, and the light knows what well
have. an aiel lord, maybe.
no, loial said, he has the look. you remember, rand, i remarked on it once, though i thought it was
just because i didnt know you humans well enough then. remember? till shade is gone, till water is
gone, into the shadow with teeth bared, screaming defiance with the last breath, to spit in sightblinders
eye on the last day. you remember, rand.
rand stared at his plate.wrap a shoufaaround your head, and you would be the image of an
aielman . that had been gawyn, brother to elayne, the daughterheir of andor.everybody thinks im
somebody im not.
what was that? mat asked. about spitting in the dark ones eye.
thats how long the aiel say theyll fight, ingtar said, and i dont doubt they will. except for peddlers
and gleemen, aiel divide the world in two. aiel, and enemies. they changed that for cairhien five
hundred years ago, for some reason no one but an aiel could understand, but i do not think they will
ever do so again.
i suppose not, loial sighed. but they do let the tuathaan, the traveling people, cross the waste.
and they dont see ogier as enemies, either, though i doubt any of us would want to go out into the
waste. aiel come to stedding shangtai sometimes to trade for sung wood. a hard people, though.
ingtar nodded. i wish i had some as hard. half as hard.
is that a joke? mat laughed. if i ran a mile wearing all the iron youre wearing, i would fall down and
sleep a week. youve done it mile after mile all day.
aiel are hard, ingtar said. man and woman, hard. ive fought them, and i know. they will run fifty
miles, and fight a battle at the end of it. theyre death walking, with any weapon or none. except a
sword. they will not touch a sword, for some reason. or ride a horse, not that they need to. if you have
a sword, and the aielman has his bare hands, it is an even fight. if youre good. they herd cattle and
goats where you or i would die of thirst before the day was done. they dig their villages into huge rock
spires out in the waste. theyve been there since the breaking, near enough. artur hawkwing tried to
dig them out and was bloodied, the only major defeats he ever suffered. by day the air in the aiel waste
shimmers with heat, and by night it freezes. and an aiel will give you that blueeyed stare and tell you
there is no place on earth he would rather be. he wont be lying, either. if they ever tried to come out,
we would be hardpressed to stop them. the aiel war lasted three years, and that was only four out of
thirteen clans.
gray eyes from his mother doesnt make him an aiel, mat said.
ingtar shrugged. as i said, i ask no questions.
when rand finally settled down for the night, his head hummed with unwanted thoughts.image of an
aielman. moiraine sedai wants to say youre from the two rivers. aiel ravaged all the way to tar
valon. born on the slopes of dragonmount. the dragon reborn.
i will not be used, he muttered, but sleep was a long time coming.



ingtar broke camp before the sun was up in the morning. they had breakfasted and were riding south
while the clouds in the east were still red with sunrise to come and dew still hung on the leaves. this time
ingtar put out scouts, and though the pace was hard, it was no longer horsekilling. rand thought maybe
ingtar had realized they were not going to do it all in a day. the trail still led south, hurin said. until, two
hours after the sun rose, one of the scouts came galloping back.
abandoned camp ahead, my lord. just on that hilltop there. must have been at least thirty or forty of
them there last night, my lord.
ingtar put spurs to horse as if he had been told the darkfriends were still there, and rand had to keep
pace or be trampled by the shienarans who galloped up the hill behind him.
there was not much to see. the cold ashes of campfires, well hidden in the trees, with what looked like
the remnants of a meal tossed in them. a refuse heap too near the fires and already buzzing with flies.
ingtar kept the others back, and dismounted to walk through the campsite with uno, examining the
ground. hurin rode the circumference of the site, sniffing. rand sat his stallion with the other men; he had
no desire for any closer look at a place where trollocs and darkfriends had camped. and a fade.and
something worse.
mat scrambled up the hill afoot and stalked into the campsite. is this what a darkfriend camp looks
like? smells a bit, but i cant say it looks any different from anybody elses. he kicked at one of the ash
heaps, knocking out a piece of burned bone, and stooped to pick it up. what do darkfriends eat?
doesnt look like a sheep bone, or a cow.
there was murder done here, hurin said mournfully. he scrubbed at his nose with a kerchief. worse
than murder.
there were trollocs here, ingtar said, looking straight at mat. i suppose they got hungry, and the
darkfriends were handy. mat dropped the blackened bone; he looked as if he were going to be sick.
they are not going south any longer, my lord, hurin said. that took everyones attention. he pointed
back, to the northeast. maybe theyve decided to break for the blight after all. go around us. maybe
they were just trying to put us off by coming south. he did not sound as if he believed it. he sounded
puzzled.
whatever they were trying, ingtar snarled, ill have them now. mount!
little more than an hour later, though, hurin drew rein. they changed again, my lord. south again.
and they killed someone else here.
there were no ashes there, in the gap between two hills, but a few minutes search found the body. a
man curled up and stuffed under some bushes. the back of his head was smashed in, and his eyes still
bulged with the force of the blow. no one recognized him, though he was wearing shienaran clothes.
well waste no time burying darkfriends, ingtar growled. we ride south. he suited his own words
almost before they were out of his mouth.
the day was the same as the day before had been, though. uno studied tracks and droppings, and said
they had gained a little ground on their quarry. twilight came with no sight of trollocs or darkfriends,
and the next morning there was another abandoned camp  and another murder done, so hurin said 



and another change of direction, this time to the northwest. less than two hours on that track found
another body, a man with his skull split open by an axe, and another change of direction. south again.
again gaining ground, by unos reading of the tracks. again seeing nothing but distant farms until
nightfall. and the next day was the same, changes in direction, murders and all. and the next.
every day brought them a little closer behind their prey, but ingtar fumed. he suggested cutting straight
across when the trail changed direction of a morning  surely they would come on the trail heading south
again, and gain more time  and before anyone could speak, he said it was a bad idea, in case this once
the men they hunted did not turn south. he urged everyone to greater speed, to start earlier and ride till
full dark. he reminded them of the charge the amyrlin seat had given them, to recover the horn of
valere, and let nothing bar their way. he spoke of the glory they would have, their names remembered in
story and history, in gleemens tales and bards songs, the men who found the horn. he talked as if he
could not stop, and he stared down the trail they followed as if his hope of the light lay at the end of it.
even uno began to look at him askance.
and so they came to the river erinin.
it could not properly be called a village at all, to rands mind. he sat his horse among the trees, peering
up at half a dozen small houses with woodshingled roofs and eaves almost to the ground, on a hilltop
overlooking the river beneath the morning sun. few people passed this way. it was only a few hours
since they had broken camp, but past time for them to have found the remains of the darkfriends resting
place if the pattern held. they had seen nothing of the sort, however.
the river itself was not much like the mighty erinin of story, here so far toward its source in the spine of
the world. perhaps sixty paces of swift water to the far bank, lined with trees, and a bargelike ferry on
a thick rope spanning the distance. the ferry sat snugged against the other side.
for once the trail had led straight to human habitation. straight to the houses on the hill. no one moved
on the single dirt street around which the dwellings clustered.
ambush, my lord? uno said softly.
ingtar gave the necessary orders, and the shienarans unlimbered their lances, sweeping around to
encircle the houses. at a hand signal from ingtar they galloped between the houses from four directions,
thundering in with eyes searching, lances ready, dust rising under their hooves. nothing moved but them.
they drew rein, and the dust began to settle.
rand returned to his quiver the arrow he had nocked, and slung his bow on his back again. mat and
perrin did the same. loial and hurin had just waited there where ingtar had left them, watching uneasily.
ingtar waved, and rand and the others rode up to join the shienarans.
i dont like the smell of this place, perrin muttered as they came among the houses. hurin gave him a
look, and he stared back until hurin dropped his eyes. it smells wrong.
bloody darkfriends and trollocs went straight through, my lord, uno said, pointing to a few tracks
not chopped to pieces by the shienarans. straight through to the goatkissing ferry, which they bloody
left on the other side. blood and bloody ashes! were flaming lucky they didnt cut it adrift.
where are the people? loial asked.



doors stood open, curtains flapped at open windows, but no one had come out for all the thunder of
hooves.
search the houses, ingtar commanded. men dismounted and ran to comply, but they came back
shaking their heads.
theyre just gone, my lord, uno said. just bloody gone, burn me. like theyd picked up and
decided to flaming walk away in the middle of the bloody day. he stopped suddenly, pointing urgently
to a house behind ingtar. theres a woman at that window. how i bloody missed her . . . he was
running for the house before anyone else could move.
dont frighten her! ingtar shouted. uno, we need information. the light blind you, uno, dont
frighten her! the oneeyed man disappeared through the open door. ingtar raised his voice again. we
will not harm you, good lady. we are lord agelmars oathmen, from fal dara. do not be afraid! we
will not harm you.
a window at the top of the house flew up, and uno stuck his head out, staring around wildly. with an
oath he pulled back. thumps and clatters marked his passage back, as if he were kicking things in
frustration. finally he appeared from the doorway.
gone, my lord. but she was there. a woman in a white dress, at the window. i saw her. i even
thought i saw her inside, for a moment, but then she was gone, and . . . he took a deep breath. the
house is empty, my lord. it was a measure of his agitation that he did not curse.
curtains, mat muttered. hes jumping at bloody curtains. uno gave him a sharp look, then returned
to his horse.
where did they go? rand asked loial. do you think they ran off when the darkfriends came?and
trollocs, and a myrddraal. and hurins something worse. smart people, if they ran as hard as
they could.
i fear the darkfriends took them, rand, loial said slowly. he grimaced, almost a snarl with his broad
nose like a snout. for the trollocs. rand swallowed and wished he had not asked; it was never
pleasant to think on how trollocs fed.
whatever was done here, ingtar said, our darkfriends did it. hurin, was there violence here? killing?
hurin!
the sniffer gave a start in his saddle and looked around wildly. he had been staring across the river.
violence, my lord? yes: killing, no. or not exactly. he glanced sideways at perrin. ive never
smelled anything exactly like it before, my lord. but there was hurting done.
is there any doubt they crossed over? have they doubled back again?
they crossed, my lord. hurin looked uneasily at the far bank. they crossed. what they did on the
other side, though . . . he shrugged.
ingtar nodded. uno, i want that ferry back on this side. and i want the other side scouted before we
cross. just because there was no ambush here doesnt mean there will not be one when we are split by
the river. that ferry does not look big enough to carry us all in one trip. see to it.



uno bowed, and in moments ragan and masema were helping each other out of their armor. stripped
down to breechclouts, with a dagger stuck behind in the small of the back, they trotted to the river on
horsemens bowed legs and waded in, beginning to work their way hand over hand along the thick rope
along which the ferry ran. the cable sagged enough in the middle to put them in the river to their waists,
and the current was strong, pulling them downstream, yet in less time than rand expected they were
hauling themselves over the slatted sides of the ferry. drawing their daggers, they disappeared into the
trees.
after what seemed like forever, the two men reappeared and began pulling the ferry slowly across. the
barge butted against the bank below the village, and masema tied it off while ragan trotted up to where
ingtar waited. his face was pale, the arrow scar on his cheek sharp, and he sounded shaken.
the far bank . . . there is no ambush on the far bank, my lord, but . . . he bowed deeply, still wet
and shivering from his excursion. my lord, you must see for yourself. the big stoneoak, fifty paces
south from the landing. i cannot say the words. you must see it yourself.
ingtar frowned, looking from ragan to the other bank. finally, he said, you have done well, ragan.
both of you have. his voice became more brisk. find these men something to dry themselves on from
the houses, uno. and see if anybody left water on for tea. put something hot into them, if you can. then
bring the second file and the pack animals over. he turned to rand. well, are you ready to see the
south bank of the erinin? he did not wait for an answer, but rode down to the ferry with hurin and half
the lancers.
rand hesitated only a moment before following. loial went with him. to his surprise, perrin rode down
ahead of them, looking grim. some of the lancers, making gruff jokes, dismounted to haul on the rope
and walk the ferry over.
mat waited until the last minute, when one of the shienarans was untying the ferry, before he kicked his
horse and crowded aboard. i have to come sooner or later, dont i? he said, breathless, to no one in
particular. i have to find it.
rand shook his head. with mat looking as healthy as he ever had, he had almost forgotten why he was
along.to find the dagger. let ingtar have the horn. i just want the dagger for mat . we will find
it, mat.
mat scowled at him  with a sneering glance for his fine red coat  and turned away. rand sighed.
it will all come right, rand, loial said quietly. somehow, it will.
the current took the ferry as it was hauled out from the bank, tugging it against the cable with a sharp
creak. the lancers were odd ferrymen, walking the deck in helmets and armor, with swords on their
backs, but they took the ferry out into the river well enough.
this is how we left home, perrin said suddenly. at taren ferry. the ferrymens boots clunking on the
deck, and the water gurgling around the ferry. this is how we left. it will be worse, this time.
how can it be worse? rand asked. perrin did not answer. he searched the far bank, and his golden
eyes almost seemed to shine, but not with eagerness.
after a minute, mat asked, how can it be worse?



it will be. i can smell it, was all perrin would say. hurin eyed him nervously, but then hurin seemed to
be eyeing everything nervously since they had left fal dara.
the ferry bumped against the south bank with a hollow thud of stout planks against hard clay, almost
under overhanging trees, and the shienarans who had been hauling on the rope mounted their horses,
except for two ingtar told to take the ferry back over for the others. the rest followed ingtar up the
bank.
fifty paces to a big stoneoak, ingtar said as they rode into the trees. he sounded too matteroffact. if
ragan could not speak of it . . . some of the soldiers eased the swords on their backs, and held their
lances ready.
at first rand thought the figures hanging by their arms from the thick gray limbs of the stoneoak were
scarecrows. crimson scarecrows. then he recognized the two faces. changu, and the other man who
had been on guard with him. nidao. eyes staring, teeth bared in a rictus of pain. they had lived a long
time after it began.
perrin made a sound in his throat, nearly a growl.
as bad as ever ive seen, my lord, hurin said faintly. as bad as ever ive smelled, excepting the
dungeon at fal dara that night.
frantically rand sought the void. the flame seemed to get in the way, the queasy light fluttering in time
with his convulsive swallows, but he pushed on until he had wrapped himself in emptiness. the
queasiness pulsed in the void with him, though. not outside, for once, but inside.no wonder, looking at
this . the thought skittered across the void like a drop of water on a hot griddle.what happened to
them?
skinned alive, he heard someone behind him say, and the sounds of somebody else retching. he
thought it was mat, but it was all far away from him, inside the void. but that nauseous flickering was in
there, too. he thought he might throw up himself.
cut them down, ingtar said harshly. he hesitated a moment, then added, bury them. we cannot be
sure they were darkfriends. they could have been taken prisoner. they could have been. let them
know the last embrace of the mother, at least. men rode forward gingerly with knives; even for
battlehardened shienarans it was no easy task, cutting down the flayed corpses of men they knew.
are you all right, rand? ingtar said. i am not used to this either.
i . . . am all right, ingtar. rand let the void vanish. he felt less sick without it; his stomach still curdled,
but it was better. ingtar nodded and turned his horse so he could watch the men working.
the burial was simple. two holes dug in the ground, and the bodies laid in as the rest of the shienarans
watched in silence. the grave diggers began shoveling earth into the graves with no more ado.
rand was shocked, but loial explained softly. shienarans believe we all came from earth, and must
return to earth. they never use coffins or shrouds, and the bodies are never clothed. the earth must hold
the body. the last embrace of the mother, they call it. and there are never any words except `the light
shine on you, and the creator shelter you. the last embrace of the mother welcome you home. loial
sighed and shook his huge head. i do not think anyone will say them this time. no matter what ingtar
says, rand, there cannot be much doubt that changu and nidao slew the guards at the dog gate and let



the darkfriends into the keep. it had to be they who were responsible for all of it.
then who shot the arrow at  at the amyrlin? rand swallowed.who shot at me? loial said nothing.
uno arrived with the rest of the men and the packhorses as the last earth was being shoveled onto the
graves. someone told him what they had found, and the oneeyed man spat. goatkissing trollocs do
that along the blight, sometimes. when they want to shake your bloody nerve, or flaming warn you not to
follow. burn me if it works here, either.
before they rode away, ingtar paused on his horse beside the unmarked graves, two mounds of bare
earth that looked too small to hold men. after a moment he said, the light shine on you, and the
creator shelter you. the last embrace of the mother welcome you home. when he raised his head, he
looked at each man in turn. there was no expression on any face, least of all on ingtars. they saved
lord agelmar at tarwins gap, he said. several of the lancers nodded. ingtar turned his horse. which
way, hurin?
south, my lord.
take the trail! we hunt!
the forest soon gave way to gently rolling flatland, sometimes crossed by a shallow stream that had dug
itself a highbanked channel, with never more than a low rise or a squat hill that barely deserved the
name. perfect country for the horses. ingtar took advantage of it, setting a steady, groundcovering pace.
occasionally rand saw what might have been a farmhouse in the distance, and once what he thought was
a village, with smoke rising from chimneys a few miles off and something flashing white in the sun, but the
land near them stayed empty of human life, long swathes of grass dotted with brush and occasional trees,
with now and again a small thicket, never more than a hundred paces across.
ingtar put out scouts, two men riding ahead, in sight only when they topped an occasional rise. he had a
silver whistle hanging around his neck to call them back if hurin said the trail had veered, but it did not.
south. always south.
we will reach the field of talidar in three or four days at this rate, ingtar said as they rode. artur
hawkwings greatest single victory, when the halfmen led the trollocs out of the blight against him. six
days and nights, it lasted, and when it was done, the trollocs fled back into the blight and never dared
challenge him again. he raised a monument there to his victory, a spire a hundred spans high. he would
not let them put his own name on it, but rather the names of every man who fell, and a golden sun at the
top, symbol that there the light had triumphed over the shadow.
i would like to see that, loial said. i have never heard of this monument.
ingtar was silent for a moment, and when he spoke his voice was quiet. it is not there any longer,
builder. when hawkwing died, the ones who fought over his empire could not bear to leave a monument
to a victory of his, even if it did not mention his name. theres nothing left but the mound where it stood.
in three or four days we can see that, at least. his tone did not allow much conversation afterwards.
with the sun hanging golden overhead, they passed a structure, square and made of plastered brick, less
than a mile from their path. it was not tall, no more than two stories still standing anywhere he saw, but it
covered a good hide of ground. an air of long abandonment hung about it, roofs gone except for a few
stretches of dark tile clinging to bits of rafter, most of the oncewhite plaster fallen to bare the dark,
weathered brick beneath, walls fallen to show courtyards and decaying chambers inside. brush, and even



trees, grew in the cracks of what had once been courtyards.
a manor house, ingtar explained. the little humor he had regained seemed to fade as he looked at the
structure. when harad dakar still stood, i expect the manorman farmed this land for a league around.
orchards, maybe. the hardani loved their orchards.
harad dakar? rand said, and ingtar snorted.
does no one learn history any longer? harad dakar, the capital city of hardan, which nation this once
was that we are riding across.
ive seen an old map, rand replied in a tight voice. i know about the nations that arent there
anymore. maredo, and goaban, and carralain. but there wasnt any hardan on it.
there were once others that are gone now, too, loial said. mar haddon, which is now haddon
mirk, and almoth. kintara. the war of the hundred years cut artur hawkwings empire into many
nations, large and small. the small were gobbled up by the large, or else united, like altara and murandy.
forced together would be a better word than united, i suppose.
so what happened to them? mat demanded. rand had not noticed perrin and mat ride up to join
them. they had been at the rear, as far from rand althor as they could get, the last he had seen.
they could not hold together, the ogier replied. crops failed, or trade failed. people failed.
something failed in each case, and the nation dwindled. often neighboring countries absorbed the land,
when the nations were gone, but they never lasted, those annexations. in time, the land truly was
abandoned. some villages hang on here and there, but mostly they have all gone to wilderness. it is
nearly three hundred years since harad dakar was finally abandoned, but even before that it was a shell,
with a king who could not control what happened inside the city walls. harad dakar itself is completely
gone now, i understand. all the towns and cities of hardan are gone, the stone carted away by farmers
and villagers for their own use. most of the farms and villages made with it are gone, too. so i read, and
ive seen nothing to change it.
it was quite a quarry, harad dakar, for almost a hundred years, ingtar said bitterly. the people left,
finally, and then the city was hauled away, stone by stone. all faded away, and what has not gone is
fading. everything, everywhere, fading. there is hardly a nation that truly controls the land it claims on a
map, and there is hardly a land that claims today on a map what it did even a hundred years ago. when
the war of the hundred years ended, a man rode from one nation into another without end from the
blight to the sea of storms. now we can ride through wilderness claimed by no nation for almost the
whole of the land. we in the borderlands have our battle with the blight to keep us strong, and whole.
perhaps they did not have what they needed to keep them strong. you say they failed, builder? yes,
they failed, and what nation standing whole today will fail tomorrow? we are being swept away,
humankind. swept away like flotsam on a flood. how long until there is nothing left but the borderlands?
how long before we, too, go under, and there is nothing left but trollocs and myrddraal all the way to
the sea of storms?
there was a shocked silence. not even mat broke it. ingtar rode lost in his own dark thoughts.
after a time the scouts came galloping back, straight in the saddles, lances erect against the sky. a
village ahead, my lord. we were not seen, but it lies directly in our line of march.
ingtar shook himself out of his brown study, but did not speak until they had reached the crest of a low



ridge looking down on the village, and then it was only to command a halt while he dug a looking glass
from his saddlebags and raised it to peer at the village.
rand studied the village with interest. it was as big as emonds field, though that was not very big
compared to some of the towns he had seen since leaving the two rivers, much less the cities. the
houses were all low and plastered with white clay, and they appeared to have grass growing on sloping
roofs. a dozen windmills, scattered through the village, turned lazily, their long, clothcovered arms
flashing white in the sun. a low wall encircled the village, grassy dirt and chest high, and outside that was
a wide ditch with sharpened stakes thick in the bottom. there was no gate in the one opening he could
see in the wall, but he supposed it could be blocked easily enough with a cart or wagon. he could not
see any people.
not even a dog in sight, ingtar said, returning the looking glass to his saddlebags. are you sure they
did not see you? he asked the scouts.
not unless they have the dark ones own luck, my lord, one of the men replied. we never crested
the rise. we didnt see anyone moving then either, my lord.
ingtar nodded. the trail, hurin?
hurin drew a deep breath. toward the village, my lord. straight to it, as near as i can tell from here.
watch sharp, ingtar commanded, gathering his reins. and do not believe that theyre friendly just
because they smile. if there is anyone there. he led them down toward the village at a slow walk, and
reached up to loosen his sword in its scabbard.
rand heard the sounds of others behind him doing the same. after a moment, he eased his, too. trying
to stay alive was not the same as trying to be a hero, he decided.
you think these people would help darkfriends? perrin asked ingtar. the shienaran was slow in
answering.
they have no great love for shienarans, he said finally. they think we should protect them. us, or the
cairhienin. cairhien did claim this land, once the last king of hardan died. all the way to the erinin, they
claimed it. they could not hold it, though. they gave up the claim nearly a hundred years ago. the few
people who still live here dont have to worry about trollocs this far south, but there are plenty of human
brigands. thats why they have the wall, and the ditch. all their villages do. their fields will be hidden in
hollows around here, but no one will live outside the wall. they would swear fealty to any king who
would give them his protection, but we have all we can do against the trollocs. they do not love us for it,
though. as they reached the opening in the low wall, he added again, watch sharp!
all the streets led toward a village square, but there was no one in the streets, no one peering from a
window. not even a dog moved, not so much as a chicken. nothing living. open doors swung, creaking
in the wind, counterpoint to the rhythmic squeak of the windmills. the horses hooves sounded loud on
the packed dirt of the street.
like at the ferry, hurin muttered, but different. he rode hunched in his saddle, head down as if he
were trying to hide behind his own shoulders. violence done, but . . . i dont know. it was bad here. it
smells bad.
uno, ingtar said, take one file and search the houses. if you find anyone, bring them to me in the



square. do not frighten them this time, though. i want answers, not people running for their lives. he led
the other soldiers toward the center of the village as uno got his ten dismounted.
rand hesitated, looking around. the creaking doors, the squealing windmills, the horses hooves, all
made too much noise, as if there were not another sound in the world. he scanned the houses. the
curtains in an open window beat against the outside of the house. they all seemed lifeless. with a sigh he
got down and walked to the nearest house, then stopped, staring at the door.
its just a door. what are you afraid of?he wished he did not feel as if there was something waiting
on the other side. he pushed it open.
inside was a tidy room. or had been. the table was set for a meal, ladderback chairs gathered around,
some plates already served. a few flies buzzed above bowls of turnips and peas, and more crawled on a
cold roast sitting in its own congealed grease. there was a slice half carved from the roast, the fork still
standing stuck in the meat and the carving knife lying partway in the platter as if dropped. rand stepped
inside.
blink.
a smiling, baldheaded man in rough clothes laid a slice of meat on a plate held by a woman with a worn
face. she was smiling, too, though. she added peas and turnips to the plate and passed it to one of the
children lining the table. there were half a dozen children, boys and girls, from nearly grown down to
barely tall enough to look over the table. the woman said something, and the girl taking the plate from
her laughed. the man started to cut another slice.
suddenly another girl screamed, pointing at the door to the street. the man dropped the carving knife
and whirled, then he screamed, too, face tight with horror, and snatched up a child. the woman grabbed
another, and motioned desperately to the others, her mouth working frantically, silently. they all
scrabbled toward a door in the back of the room.
that door burst open, and 
blink.
rand could not move. the flies buzzing over the table sounded louder. his breath made a cloud in front
of his mouth.
blink.
a smiling, baldheaded man in rough clothes laid a slice of meat on a plate held by a woman with a worn
face. she was smiling, too, though. she added peas and turnips to the plate and passed it to one of the
children lining the table. there were half a dozen children, boys and girls, from nearly grown down to
barely tall enough to look over the table. the woman said something, and the girl taking the plate from
her laughed. the man started to cut another slice.
suddenly another girl screamed, pointing at the door to the street. the man dropped the carving knife
and whirled, then he screamed, too, face tight with horror, and snatched up a child. the woman grabbed
another, and motioned desperately to the others, her mouth working frantically, silently. they all
scrabbled toward the door in the back of the room.
that door burst open, and 



blink.
rand struggled, but his muscles seemed frozen. the room was colder; he wanted to shiver, but he could
not move even that much. flies crawled all over the table. he groped for the void. the sour light was
there, but he did not care. he had to 
blink.
a smiling, baldheaded man in rough clothes laid a slice of meat on a plate held by a woman with a worn
face. she was smiling, too, though. she added peas and turnips to the plate and passed it to one of the
children lining the table. there were half a dozen children, boys and girls, from nearly grown down to
barely tall enough to look over the table. the woman said something, and the girl taking the plate from
her laughed. the man started to cut another slice.
suddenly another girl screamed, pointing at the door to the street. the man dropped the carving knife
and whirled, then he screamed, too, face tight with horror, and snatched up a child. the woman grabbed
another, and motioned desperately to the others, her mouth working frantically, silently. they all
scrabbled toward a door in the back of the room.
that door burst open, and 
blink.
the room was freezing.so cold . flies blackened the table; the walls were a shifting mass of flies, the
floor, the ceiling, all black with them. they crawled on rand, covering him, crawled over his face, his
eyes, into his nose, his mouth.light, help me. cold . the flies buzzed like thunder.cold . it penetrated
the void, mocking the emptiness, encasing him in ice. desperately he reached for the flickering light. his
stomach twisted, but the light was warm. warm. hot. he was hot.
suddenly he was tearing at . . . something. he did not know what, or how. cobwebs made of steel.
moonbeams carved from stone. they crumbled at his touch, but he knew he had not touched anything.
they shriveled and melted with the heat that surged through him, heat like a forge fire, heat like the world
burning, heat like 
it was gone. panting, he looked around with wide eyes. a few flies lay on the halfcarved roast, in the
platter. dead flies.six flies. only six . there were more in the bowls, half a dozen tiny black specks
among the cold vegetables. all dead. he staggered out into the street.
mat was just coming out of a house across the street, shaking his head. nobody there, he told perrin,
still on his horse. it looks like they just got up in the middle of supper and walked away.
a shout came from the square.
theyve found something, perrin said, digging his heels into his horses flanks. mat scrambled into his
saddle and galloped after him.
rand. mounted red more slowly; the stallion shied as if feeling his unease. he glanced at the houses as
he rode slowly toward the square, but he could not make himself look at them for long.mat went in one,
and nothing happened to him . he resolved not to set foot inside another house in that village no matter
what. booting red, he quickened his pace.



everyone was standing like statues in front of a large building with wide double doors. rand did not
think it could be an inn; there was no sign, for one thing. perhaps a village meeting place. he joined the
silent circle, and stared along with the rest.
there was a man spreadeagled across the doors with thick spikes through wrists and shoulders. more
spikes had been driven into his eyes to hold his head up. dark, dried blood made fans down his cheeks.
scuff marks on the wood behind his boots showed that he had been alive when it was done. when it
began, anyway.
rands breath caught. not a man. those black clothes, blacker than black, had never been worn by any
human. the wind flapped an end of the cloak caught behind the body  which it did not always, he
knew too well; the wind did not always touch those clothes  but there had never been any eyes in that
pale, bloodless face.
myrddraal, he breathed, and it was as if his speaking released all the others. they began to move
again, and breathe.
who, mat began, and had to stop to swallow. who could do this to a fade? his voice squeaked at
the end.
i dont know, ingtar said. i do not know. he looked around, examining faces, or perhaps counting
to be sure everyone was there. and i do not think we will learn anything here. we ride. mount! hurin,
find the trail out of this place.
yes, my lord. yes. with pleasure. that way, my lord. theyre still heading south.
they rode away leaving the dead myrddraal where it hung, the wind stirring its black cloak. hurin was
first beyond the wall, not waiting on ingtar for a change, but rand came close behind him.

chapter 11

glimmers of the pattern

for once, ingtar called a halt to the days march with the sun still golden above the horizon. the
toughened shienarans were feeling the effects of what they had seen in the village. ingtar had not stopped
so early before, and the campsite he chose had the look of a place that could be defended. it was a deep
hollow, almost round, and big enough to hold all the men and horses comfortably. a sparse thicket of
scrub oak and leatherleaf covered the outer slopes. the rim itself stood more than high enough to hide



anyone in the campsite even without the trees. the height nearly passed for a hill, in that country.
all im bloody saying, he heard uno tell ragan as they dismounted, is that i bloody saw her, burn
you. just before we found the goatkissing halfman. the same flaming woman as at the flaming ferry. she
was there, and then she bloody wasnt. you say what you bloody want to, but you watch how you
flaming say it, or ill bloody skin you myself, and burn the goatkissing hide, you sheepgutted
milkdrinker.
rand paused with one foot on the ground and the other still in the stirrup.the same woman? but there
wasnt any woman at the ferry, just some curtains blowing in the wind. and she couldnt have
gotten to that village ahead of us if there had been . the village . . .
he shied away from the thought. even more than the fade nailed to the door, he wanted to forget that
room, and the flies, and the people who were there and not there. the halfman had been real 
everybody had seen that  but the room . . .maybe im finally going mad . he wished moiraine was
there to talk to.wishing for an aes sedai. you area fool. youre well out of that, now stay out. but
am i out? what happened there?
packhorses and supplies in the middle, ingtar commanded as the lancers went about setting up camp.
rub the horses down, then saddle them again in case we must move quickly. every man sleeps by his
mount, and therell be no fires tonight. watch changes every two hours. uno, i want scouts out, as far as
they can ride and return before dark. i want to know what is out there.
hes feeling it, rand thought.it isnt just some darkfriends and a few trollocs and maybe a fade
anymore . just some darkfriends and a few trollocs, and maybe a fade! even a few days before there
would not have been any just about it. even in the borderlands, even with the blight less than a days
ride, darkfriends and trollocs and myrddraal had been bad enough for a nightmare, then. before he had
seen a myrddraal nailed to a door.what in the light could have done that? what notin the light?
before he had walked into a room where a family had had their supper and their laughter cut off.i must
have imagined it. i must have . even in his own head he did not sound very convincing. he had not
imagined the wind on the tower top, or the amyrlin saying 
rand? he jumped as ingtar spoke at his shoulder. are you going to stay all night with one foot in the
stirrup?
rand put his other foot on the ground. ingtar, what happened back at that village?
trollocs took them. the same as the people at the ferry. that is what happened. the fade . . . ingtar
shrugged and stared down at a flat, canvaswrapped bundle, large and square, in his arms; he stared at it
as if he saw hidden secrets he would rather not know. the trollocs took them for food. they do it in
villages and farms near the blight, too, sometimes, if a raid gets past the border towers in the night.
sometimes we get the people back, and sometimes not. sometimes we get them back and almost wish
we hadnt. trollocs dont always kill before they start butchering. and halfmen like to have their . . . fun.
thats worse than what the trollocs do. his voice was as steady as if he were talking of every day, and
perhaps he was, for a shienaran soldier.
rand took a deep breath to steady his stomach. the fade back there didnt have any fun, ingtar. what
could nail a myrddraal to a door, alive?
ingtar hesitated, shaking his head, then pushed the big bundle at rand. here. moiraine sedai told me to
give you this at the first camp south of the erinin. i dont know what is in it, but she said you would need



it. she said to tell you to take care of it; your life may depend on it.
rand took it reluctantly; his skin prickled at the touch of the canvas. there was something soft inside.
cloth, maybe. he held it gingerly.he doesnt want to think about the myrddraal either. what
happened in that room? he realized suddenly that for him, the fade, or even that room, was preferable
to thinking about what moiraine might have sent him.
i was told to tell you at the same time that if anything happens to me, the lances will follow you.
me! rand gasped, forgetting the bundle and everything else. ingtar met his incredulous stare with a
calm nod. thats crazy! ive never led anything but a flock of sheep, ingtar. they would not follow me
anyway. besides, moiraine cant tell you who your second is. its uno.
uno and i were called to lord agelmar the morning we left. moiraine sedai was there, but it was lord
agelmar who told me. you are second, rand.
but why, ingtar? why? moiraines hand was bright and clear in it, hers and the amyrlins, pushing him
along the path they had chosen, but he had to ask.
the shienaran looked as if he did not understand it either, but he was a soldier, used to odd commands
in the endless war along the blight. i heard rumors from the womens apartments that you were really a .
. .  he spread gauntleted hands. no matter. i know you deny it. just as you deny the look of your own
face. moiraine sedai says youre a shepherd, but i never saw a shepherd with a heronmark blade. no
matter. ill not claim i would have chosen you myself, but i think you have it in you to do what is needed.
you will do your duty, if it comes to it.
rand wanted to say it was no duty of his, but instead he said, uno knows about this. who else,
ingtar?
all the lances. when we shienarans ride, every man knows who is next in line if the man in command
falls. a chain unbroken right down to the last man left, even if hes nothing but a horseholder. that way,
you see, even if he is the last man, he is not just a straggler running and trying to stay alive. he has the
command, and duty calls him to do what must be done. if i go to the last embrace of the mother, the duty
is yours. you will find the horn, and you will take it where it belongs. you will. there was a peculiar
emphasis in ingtars last words.
the bundle in rands arms seemed to weigh ten stone.light, she could be a hundred leagues off, and
she still reaches out and tugs the leash. this way, rand. that way. youre the dragon reborn,
rand . i dont want the duty, ingtar. i will not take it. light, im just a shepherd! why wont anybody
believe that?
you will do your duty, rand. when the man at the top of the chain fails, everything below him falls
apart. too much is falling apart. too much already. peace favor your sword, rand althor.
ingtar, i   but ingtar was walking away, calling to see if uno had the scouts out yet.
rand stared at the bundle in his arms and licked his lips. he was afraid he knew what was in it. he
wanted to look, yet he wanted to throw it in a fire without opening it; he thought he might, if he could be
sure it would burn without anyone seeing what was inside, if he could be sure what was inside would
burn at all. but he could not look there, where other eyes than his might see.



he glanced around the camp. the shienarans were unloading the pack animals, some already handing
out a cold supper of dried meat and flatbread. mat and perrin tended their horses, and loial sat on a
stone reading a book, with his longstemmed pipe clenched between his teeth and a wisp of smoke
curling above his head. gripping the bundle as if afraid he might drop it, rand sneaked into the trees.
he knelt in a small clearing sheltered by thickfoliaged branches and set the bundle on the ground. for a
time he just stared at it.she wouldnt have. she couldnt . a small voice answered,oh, yes, she could.
she could and would . finally he set about untying the small knots in the cords that bound it. neat
knots, tied with a precision that spoke loudly of moiraines own hand; no servant had done this for her.
she would not have dared let any servant see.
when he had the last cord unfastened, he opened out what was folded inside with hands that felt numb,
then stared at it, his mouth full of dust. it was all of one piece, neither woven, nor dyed, nor painted. a
banner, white as snow, big enough to be seen the length of a field of battle. and across it marched a
rippling figure like a serpent scaled in gold and crimson, but a serpent with four scaled legs, each tipped
with five golden claws, a serpent with eyes like the sun and a golden lions mane. he had seen it once
before, and moiraine had told him what it was. the banner of lews therin telamon, lews therin
kinslayer, in the war of the shadow. the banner of the dragon.
look at that! look what hes got, now! mat burst into the clearing. perrin came after him more
slowly. first fancy coats, mat snarled, and now a banner! well hear no end of lording it now, with 
 mat got close enough to see the banner clearly, and his jaw dropped. light! he stumbled back a
step. burn me! he had been there, too, when moiraine named the banner. so had perrin.
anger boiled up in rand, anger at moiraine and the amyrlin seat, pushing him, pulling him. he snatched
up the banner in both hands and shook it at mat, words boiling out uncontrollably. thats right! the
dragons banner! mat took another step back. moiraine wants me to be a puppet on tar valon
strings, a false dragon for the aes sedai. shes going to push it down my throat whatever i want. but 
i  will  not  be  used!
mat had backed up against a tree trunk. a false dragon? he swallowed. you? that . . . thats
crazy.
perrin had not retreated. he squatted down with his thick arms on his knees and studied rand with
those bright golden eyes. in the evening shadows they seemed to shine. if the aes sedai want you for a
false dragon . . . he paused, frowning, thinking things through. finally, he said quietly, rand, can you
channel? mat gave a strangled gasp.
rand let the banner drop; he hesitated only a moment before nodding wearily. i did not ask for it. i
dont want it. but . . . but i do not think i know how to stop it. the room with the flies came back
unbidden to his mind. i dont think theyll let me stop.
burn me! mat breathed. blood and bloody ashes! theyll kill us, you know. all of us. perrin and me
as well as you. if ingtar and the others find out, they will cut our bloody throats for darkfriends. light,
theyll probably think we were part of stealing the horn, and killing those people in fal dara.
shut up, mat, perrin said calmly.
dont tell me to shut up. if ingtar doesnt kill us, rand will go mad and do it for him. burn me! burn
me! mat slid down the tree to sit on the ground. why didnt they gentle you? if the aes sedai know,
why didnt they gentle you? i never heard of them letting a man who can wield the power just walk



away.
they dont all know, rand sighed. the amyrlin  
the amyrlin seat!she knows? light, no wonder she looked at me so strange.
  and moiraine told me im the dragon reborn, and then they said i could go wherever i wanted.
dont you see, mat? they are trying to use me.
doesnt change you being able to channel, mat muttered. if i were you, id be halfway to the aryth
ocean by now. and i would not stop until i found someplace where there were no aes sedai, and never
likely to be any. and no people. i mean . . . well . . .
shut up, mat, perrin said. whyare you here, rand? the longer you stay around people, the more
likely it is somebody will find out and send for aes sedai. aes sedai whowont tell you to go on about
your business. he paused, scratching his head over that. and mats right about ingtar. i dont doubt he
would name you darkfriend and kill you. kill all of us, maybe. he seems to like you, but hed still do it, i
think. a false dragon? so would the others. masema wouldnt need that much excuse, for you. so why
arent you gone?
rand shrugged. i was going, but first the amyrlin came, and then the horn was stolen, and the dagger,
and moiraine said mat was dying, and . . . light, i thought i could stay with you until we found the
dagger, at least; i thought i could help with that. maybe i was wrong.
you came because of the dagger? mat said quietly. he rubbed his nose and grimaced. i never
thought of that. i never thought you wanted to . . . aaaah! are you feeling all right? i mean, you arent
going mad already, are you?
rand dug a pebble out of the ground and threw it at him.
ouch! mat rubbed his arm. i was just asking. i mean, all those fancy clothes, and all that talk about
being a lord. well, that isnt exactly right in the head.
i was trying to get rid of you, fool! i was afraid id go mad and hurt you. his eyes dropped to the
banner, and his voice lowered. i will, eventually, if i dont stop it. light, i dont know how to stop it.
that is what im afraid of, mat said, standing. no offense, rand, but i think i will just sleep as far
away from you as i can, if you dont mind. thats if you are staying. i heard about a fellow who could
channel, once. a merchants guard told me. before the red ajah found him, he woke one morning, and
his whole village was smashed flat. all the houses, all the people, everything but the bed he was sleeping
in, like a mountain had rolled over them.
perrin said, in that case, mat, you should sleep cheek by jowl with him.
i may be a fool, but i intend to be a live fool. mat hesitated, looking sideways at rand. look, i know
you came along to help me, and i am grateful. i really am. but you just are not the same anymore. you
understand that, dont you? he waited as if he expected an answer. none came. finally he vanished
into the trees, back toward the camp.
what about you? rand asked.



perrin shook his head, shaggy curls swinging. i dont know, rand. you are the same, but then again,
you arent. a man channeling; my mother used to frighten me with that, when i was little. i just do not
know. he stretched out his hand and touched a corner of the banner. i think i would burn this, or bury
it, if i were you. then id run so far, so fast, no aes sedai would ever find me. mat was right about
that. he stood up, squinting at the western sky, beginning to turn red with the sinking sun. time to get
back to the camp. you think on what i said, rand. id run. but maybe you cant run. think of that, too.
his yellow eyes seemed to look inward, and he sounded tired. sometimes you cant run. then he was
gone, too.
rand knelt there, staring at the banner spread out on the ground. well, sometimes you can run, he
muttered. only, maybe she gave me this to make me run. maybe she has something waiting for me, if i
run. i wont do what she wants. i wont. ill bury it right here. but she said my life may depend on it, and
aes sedai never lie so you can see it . . .  suddenly his shoulders shook with silent laughter. now im
talking to myself. maybe iam going mad already.
when he returned to the camp, he carried the banner wrapped in the canvas once more, tied with knots
less neat than moiraines had been.
the light had begun to fail and the shadow of the rim covered half the hollow. the soldiers were settling
in, all with their horses by their sides, lances propped to hand. mat and perrin were bedding down
alongside their horses. rand gave them a sad look, then fetched red, standing where he had been left
with his reins dangling, and went to the other side of the hollow, where hurin had joined loial. the ogier
had given over reading and was examining the halfburied stone on which he had been sitting, tracing
something on the stone with the long stem of his pipe.
hurin stood and gave rand something just short of a bow. hope you dont mind me making my bed
here, lord  uh  rand. i was just listening to the builder here.
there you are, rand, loial said. you know, i think this stone was worked once. see, its weathered,
but it looks as if it was a column of some kind. and there are markings, also. i cant quite make them
out, but they look familiar, somehow.
maybe youll be able to see them better in the morning, rand said. he pulled the saddlebags from
red. ill be glad of your company, hurin.im glad of anybodys company who isnt afraid of me.
how much longer can i have it, though?
he shifted everything into one side of the saddlebags  spare shirts and breeches and woolen
stockings, sewing kit, tinder box, tin plate and cup, a greenwood box with knife and fork and spoon, a
packet of dried meat and flatbread for emergency rations, and all the other travelers necessaries  then
stuffed the canvaswrapped banner into the empty pocket. it bulged, the straps barely reaching the
buckles, but then, the other side bulged now, too. it would do.
loial and hurin seemed to sense his mood, leaving him in silence while he stripped saddle and bridle
from red, rubbed the big bay down with tufts of grass torn from the ground, then resaddled him. rand
refused their offer of food; he did not think he could have stomached the best meal he had ever seen just
then. all three of them made their beds there beside the stone, a simple matter of a blanket folded for a
pillow and cloak to cover.
the camp was silent now, but rand lay awake past the fall of full dark. his mind darted back and forth.
the banner.what is she trying to make me do? the village.what could kill a fade like that ? worst
of all, the house in the village.did it really happen? am i going mad already? do i run, or do i stay?



i have to stay. i have to help mat find the dagger.
an exhausted sleep finally came, and with sleep, unbidden, the void surrounded him, flickering with an
uneasy glow that disturbed his dreams.

padan fain stared northward out into the night, past the only fire in his camp, smiling a fixed smile that
never touched his eyes. he still thought of himself as padan fain  padan fain was the core of him 
but he had been changed, and he knew it. he knew many things, now, more than any of his old masters
could suspect. he had been a darkfriend long years before baalzamon summoned him and set him on
the track of the three young men from emonds field, distilling what he knew of them, distilling him, and
feeding the essence back so that he couldfeel them,smell where they had been, follow wherever they
ran. especially the one. a part of him still cringed, remembering what baalzamon had done to him, but it
was a small part, hidden, suppressed. he was changed. following the three had led him into shadar
logoth. he had not wanted to go, but he had had to obey. then. and in shadar logoth . . .
fain drew a deep breath and fingered the rubyhilted dagger at his belt. that had come from shadar
logoth, too. it was the only weapon he carried, the only one he needed; it felt like a part of him. he was
whole within himself, now. that was all that mattered.
he cast a glance to either side of his fire. the twelve darkfriends who were left, their oncefine clothes
now rumpled and dirty, huddled in the darkness to one side, staring not at the fire, but at him. on the
other squatted his trollocs, twenty in number, the alltoohuman eyes in those animaltwisted mens faces
following his every move like mice watching a cat.
it had been a struggle at first, waking each morning to find himself not completely whole, to find the
myrddraal back in command, raging and demanding they go north, to the blight, to shayol ghul. but bit
by bit those mornings of weakness grew shorter, until . . . he remembered the feel of the hammer in his
hand, driving the spikes in, and he smiled; this time it did touch his eyes, with the joy of sweet memory.
weeping from the dark caught his ear, and his smile faded.i should never have let the trollocs take
so many . an entire village to slow them down. if those few houses at the ferry had not been deserted,
perhaps . . . but trollocs were greedy by nature, and in the euphoria of watching the myrddraal die, he
had not paid attention as he should.
he glanced at the trollocs. any one of them was nearly twice as tall as he, strong enough to break him
to flinders with one hand, yet they edged back, still crouching. kill them. all. you may feed, but then
make a pile of everything that remains  for our friends to find. put the heads on top. neatly, now. he
laughed, and cut it off short. go!
the trollocs scrambled away, drawing scythelike swords and raising spiked axes. in moments shrieks
and bellows rose from where the villagers were bound. pleas for mercy and childrens screams were cut
off by solid thuds and unpleasant squishing noises, like melons being broken.
fain turned his back on the cacophony to look at his darkfriends. they were his, too, body and soul.
such souls as they had left. every one of them was mired as deeply as he had been, before he found his
way out. every one with nowhere to go except to follow him. their eyes clung to him, fearful, pleading.
you think they will grow hungry again before we find another village or a farm? they may. you think i
will be letting them have some more of you? well, perhaps one or two. there arent any more horses to
spare.



the others were only commoners, one woman managed in an unsteady voice. dirt streaked her face
above a finely cut dress that marked her as a merchant, and wealthy. smears stained the good gray cloth,
and a long tear marred her skirt. they were peasants. we have served  i have served  
fain cut her off, his easy tone making his words all the harder. what are you, to me? less than
peasants. herd cattle for the trollocs, perhaps? if you want to live, cattle, you must be useful.
the womans face broke. she sobbed, and suddenly all the rest were babbling, telling him how useful
they were, men and women who had had influence and position before they were called to fulfill their
oaths at fal dara. they spilled out the names of important, powerful people whom they knew in the
borderlands, in cairhien, and other lands. they babbled of the knowledge they alone had of this land or
that, of political situations, alliances, intrigues, all the things they could tell him if he let them serve him. the
noise of them blended with the sounds of the trollocs slaughter and fit right in.
fain ignored all of it  he had no fear of turning his back on them, not since they had seen the fade
dealt with  and went to his prize. kneeling, he ran his hands over the ornate, golden chest, feeling the
power locked inside. he had to have a trolloc carry it  he did not trust the humans enough to load it
on a horse and packsaddle; some dreams of power might be strong enough to overcome even fear of
him, but trollocs never dreamed of anything except killing  and he had not yet puzzled out how to
open it. but that would come. everything would come. everything.
unsheathing the dagger, he laid it atop the chest before settling himself down beside the fire. that blade
was a better guard than trolloc or human. they had all seen what happened when he used it, once; none
would come within a span of that bared blade without his command, and then reluctantly.
lying there in his blankets, he stared northward. he could not feel althor, now; the distance between
them was too great. or perhaps althor was doing his vanishing trick. sometimes, in the keep, the boy
had suddenly vanished from fains senses. he did not know how, but always althor came back, just as
suddenly as he had gone. he would come back this time, too.
this time you come to me, rand althor. before, i followed you like a dog driven on the trail, but now
you follow me. his laughter was a cackle that even he knew was mad, but he did not care. madness
was a part of him, too. come to me, althor. the dance is not even begun yet. well dance on toman
head, and ill be free of you. ill see you dead at last.

chapter 12

woven in the pattern



egwene hurried after nynaeve toward the knot of aes sedai around the amyrlin seats horseborne
palanquin, her desire to know what had caused the turmoil in fal dara keep outweighing even her worry
over rand. he was beyond her reach, for the moment. bela, her shaggy mare, was with the aes sedais
horses, and nynaeves mount, too.
the warders, hands on sword hilts and eyes searching everywhere, made a steel circle around the aes
sedai and the palanquin. they were an island of relative calm in the courtyard, where shienaran soldiers
still ran amid the keeps horrified inhabitants. egwene pushed in beside nynaeve  the two of them all
but ignored after a single sharp glance from the warders; all knew they would be leaving with the amyrlin
 and caught enough in the crowds murmurs to learn of an arrow that had flashed seemingly from
nowhere and a bowman yet uncaught.
egwene stopped, wideeyed, too shocked even to think that she was surrounded by aes sedai. an
attempt on the life of the amyrlin seat. it went beyond thinking of.
the amyrlin sat in her palanquin with the curtains drawn back, the bloodstained rip in her sleeve drawing
all eyes, and faced down lord agelmar. you will find the bowman or you will not, my son. either way,
my business in tar valon is as urgent as that of ingtar on his quest. i leave now.
but, mother, agelmar protested, this attempt on your life changes everything. we still do not know
who sent the man, or why. an hour more, and i will have the bowman and the answers for you.
the amyrlin barked a laugh with no amusement in it. youll need slyer bait or finer nets to catch this
fish, my son. by the time you have the man, it will be too late in the day for leaving. there are too many
who would cheer to see me dead for me to worry overmuch about this one. you may send me news of
what you find, if you find anything at all. her eyes traveled around the towers overlooking the courtyard,
and the ramparts and archers balconies, still jammed with people, though silent now. the arrow had to
have come from one of those places. i think this bowman is already fled from fal dara.
but, mother  
the woman in the palanquin cut him off with a sharp gesture of finality. not even the lord of fal dara
could press the amyrlin seat too far. her eyes came to rest on egwene and nynaeve, piercing eyes that
seemed to egwene to be seeing everything about herself that she wanted to keep secret. egwene took a
step back, then caught herself and dropped a curtsy, wondering if that were proper; no one had ever
explained to her the protocol of meeting the amyrlin seat. nynaeve kept her back straight and returned
the amyrlins stare, but she fumbled for egwenes hand and gripped as hard as egwene did.
so these are your two, moiraine, the amyrlin said. moiraine gave the barest nod, and the other aes
sedai turned to stare at the two women from emonds field. egwene swallowed. they all looked as if
theyknew things, things other people did not, and it was no help at all to know that they truly did. yes, i
sense a fine spark in each of them. but what will kindle from it? thats the question, isnt it?
egwenes mouth felt dry as dust. she had seen master padwhin, the carpenter back home, look at his
tools much the same way as the amyrlin was looking at the two of them. this one for this purpose, that
one for that.
the amyrlin said abruptly, it is time we were gone. to horse. lord agelmar and i can say what needs
be said without you all gawking like novices on a freeday. to horse!



at her command the warders scattered to their mounts, still wary, and the aes sedai, all but leane,
glided away from the palanquin to their own horses. as egwene and nynaeve turned to obey, a servant
appeared at lord agelmars shoulder with a silver chalice. agelmar took it with a dissatisfied twist to his
mouth.
with this cup from my hand, mother, take my wish that you fare well on this day, and every . . .
whatever else they said was lost to egwene as she scrambled onto bela. by the time she had given the
shaggy mare a pat, and arranged her skirts, the palanquin was already moving toward the open gates, its
horses stepping without rein or lead. leane rode beside the palanquin, her staff propped at her stirrup.
egwene and nynaeve brought their horses along behind with the rest of the aes sedai.
roars and cheers from the crowds lining the town streets greeted the procession, all but drowning the
thunder of the drummers and the blare of the trumpeters. warders led the column, with the banner
bearing the white flame waving in ripples, and rode guard around the aes sedai, keeping the mass of
people back; archers and pikemen, the flame blazoned on their chests, followed behind in precise ranks.
the trumpets fell silent as the column wound its way out of the town and turned southward, yet the
sounds of cheering from within the town followed still. egwene glanced back often, until trees and hills hid
fal dams walls and towers.
nynaeve, riding alongside, shook her head. rand will be all right. he has lord ingtar and twenty lances
with him. in any case, there is nothing you can do about it. nothing either of us can do. she glanced
toward moiraine; the aes sedais trim white mare and lans tall black stallion made an odd pair off to
one side by themselves. not yet.
the column angled westward as it traveled, and it did not cover the ground quickly. even footmen in half
armor could not move fast through the shienaran hills, not and maintain the pace for long. still, they
pushed as hard as they could.
camps came late each night, the amyrlin allowing no stop until barely enough light remained to pitch the
tents, flattened white domes just tall enough to stand in. each pair of aes sedai from the same ajah had
one, while the amyrlin and the keeper had tents to themselves. moiraine shared the tent of her two
sisters of the blue. the soldiers slept on the ground in their own encampment, and the warders wrapped
themselves in their cloaks near the tents of the aes sedai to whom they were bonded. the tent shared by
the red sisters looked oddly lonely without any warders, while that of the greens seemed almost festive,
the two aes sedai often sitting outside long past dark to talk with the four warders they had brought
between them.
lan came once to the tent egwene shared with nynaeve, taking the wisdom into the night a little
distance away. egwene peered around the tent flap to watch. she could not hear what they said, except
that nynaeve eventually erupted in anger and came stalking back to wrap herself in her blankets and
refuse to talk at all. egwene thought her cheeks were wet, though she hid her face with a corner of her
blanket. lan stood watching the tent from the darkness for a long time before he went away. after that
he did not come again.
moiraine did not come near them, giving them only a nod in passing. she seemed to spend her waking
hours speaking with the other aes sedai, all but the red sisters, drawing them aside one by one as they
rode. the amyrlin allowed few stops for rest, and those short.
maybe she doesnt have time for us anymore, egwene observed sadly. moiraine was the one aes
sedai she knew. perhaps  though she did not like to admit it  the only one she was sure she could



trust. she found us, and we are on our way to tar valon. i suppose she has other things to concern her,
now.
nynaeve snorted softly. ill believe she is done with us when shes dead  or we are. she is sly, that
one.
other aes sedai came to their tent. egwene almost jumped out of her skin that first night out of fal
dara, when the tent flap was pushed aside and a plump, squarefaced aes sedai, with graying hair and a
vaguely distracted look in her dark eyes, ducked into their tent. she glanced at the lantern hanging at the
highest point of the tent, and the flame rose a little higher. egwene thought she felt something, thought she
almost saw something about the aes sedai when the flame grew brighter. moiraine had told her that one
day  when she had more training  she would be able tosee when another woman channeled, and to
tell a woman who could channel even if she did nothing.
i am verin mathwin, the woman said with a smile. and you are egwene alvere and nynaeve
almaera. from the two rivers, which was once manetheren. strong blood, that. it sings.
egwene exchanged glances with nynaeve as they got to their feet.
is this a summons to the amyrlin seat? egwene asked.
verin laughed. the aes sedai had a smudge of ink on her nose. oh, my, no. the amyrlin has more
important things to deal with than two young women who are not even novices yet. although, you never
can tell. you both have considerable potential, especially you, nynaeve. one day . . . she paused,
rubbing a finger thoughtfully right atop the ink smudge. but this is not one day. i am here to give you a
lesson, egwene. you have been poking in ahead of yourself, i fear.
nervously, egwene looked at nynaeve. what have i done? nothing that im aware of.
oh, nothing wrong. not exactly. somewhat dangerous, perhaps, but not exactly wrong. verin
lowered herself to the canvas floor, folding her legs under her. sit, both of you. sit. i dont mean to
crane my neck. she shifted around until she had a comfortable position. sit.
egwene settled crosslegged across from the aes sedai and did her best not to look at nynaeve.no
need to look guilty until i know if i am. and maybe not then . what is it ive done thats dangerous
but not exactly wrong?
why, youve been channeling the power, child.
egwene could only gape. nynaeve burst out, that is ridiculous. why are we going to tar valon, if not
for that?
moiraine has . . . i mean, moiraine sedai has been giving me lessons, egwene managed.
verin held up her hands for quiet, and they fell silent. she might seem vague, but she was aes sedai,
after all. child, do you think aes sedai immediately teach every girl who says she wants to be one of us
how to channel? well, i suppose you are not exactly every girl, but just the same . . . she shook her
head gravely.
then why did she? nynaeve demanded. there had been no lessons for her, and egwene was still not
sure if it rankled nynaeve or not.



because egwene had already channeled, verin said patiently.
so . . . so have i. nynaeve did not sound happy about it.
your circumstances are different, child. that you are still alive shows you weathered the various crises,
and did it on your own. i think you know how lucky you are. of every four women forced to do what
you did, only one survives. of course, wilders   verin grimaced. forgive me, but i am afraid thatis
what we in the white tower often call women who, without any training, have managed some rough
control  random, and barely enough to be called control, usually, like you, but still control of a sort.
wilders have difficulties, it is true. almost always they have built up walls to keep themselves from
knowing what it was they were doing, and those walls interfere with conscious control. the longer those
walls have to build, the harder it is to tear them down, but if they can be demolished  well, some of the
most adept sisters ever have been wilders.
nynaeve shifted irritably, and looked at the entrance as if thinking of leaving.
i dont see what any of that has to do with me, egwene said.
verin blinked at her, almost as if wondering where she had come from. with you? why, nothing. your
problem is quite different. most girls who want to become aes sedai  even most girls with the seed
inside them, like you  are afraid of it, too. even after they reach the tower, even after theyve learned
what to do and how, for months they need to be led, step by step, by a sister, or by one of the
accepted. but not you. from what moiraine tells me, you leaped into it as soon as you knew you could,
fumbling your way through the dark with never a thought of whether there was a bottomless pit under
your next step. oh, there have been others like you; you are not unique. moiraine was one herself. once
she knew what you had done, there was nothing for it but for her to begin teaching you. did moiraine
never explain any of this to you?
never. egwene wished her voice was not so breathless. she had . . . other matters to deal with.
nynaeve snorted softly.
well, moiraine has never believed in telling anyone anything they did not need to know. knowing
serves no real purpose, but then, neither does not knowing. myself, i always prefer knowing to not.
is there one? a pit, i mean?
obviously not so far, verin said, tilting her head. but the next step? she shrugged. you see, child,
the more youtry to touch the true source, the more youtry to channel the one power, the easier it
becomes to actually do it. yes, in the beginning, you stretch out to the source and more often than not it
is like grasping at air. or you actually to channelsaidar , but even when you feel the one power flowing
through you, you find you can do nothing with it. or you do something, and it isnt what you intended at
all. that is the danger. usually, with guidance and training  and the girls own fear slowing her down 
the ability to touch the source and the ability to channel the power come together with the ability to
control what she is doing. but you began trying to channel without anyone there to teach you any control
at all of what you do. i know you dont think youre very far along, and you are not, but you are like
someone who has taught herself to run up hills  sometimes, at least  without ever learning how to run
down the other side, or to walk. sooner or later you are going to fall, if you dont learn the rest of it.
now, i am not talking about anything like what happens when one of those poor men begins channeling
 you will not go mad; you wont die, not with sisters to teach and guide you  but what might you do
entirely by accident, never meaning to? for an instant the vagueness had dropped from verins eyes.



for an instant, it seemed, the aes sedais gaze had flicked from egwene to nynaeve as sharply as the
amyrlins had. your innate abilities are strong, child, and they will grow stronger. you must learn to
control them before you harm yourself, or someone else, or a great many people. that is what moiraine
was trying to teach you. that is what i will try to help you with tonight, and what a sister will help you
with every night until we put you into sheriams most capable hands. she is mistress of novices.
egwene thought,can she know about rand? it isnt possible. shed never have let him leave fal
dara if she even suspected . but she was sure she had not imagined what she saw. thank you, verin
sedai. i will try.
nynaeve rose smoothly to her feet. i will go sit by the fire and leave you two alone.
you should stay, verin said. you could profit by it. from what moiraine has told me, it should take
only a little training for you to be raised to the accepted.
nynaeve hesitated only a moment before shaking her head firmly. i thank you for the offer, but i can
wait until we reach tar valon. egwene, if you need me, i will be  
by any gauge, verin cut in, you are a woman grown, nynaeve. usually, the younger a novice, the
better she does. not with the training necessarily, but because a novice is expected to do as she is told,
when she is told and without question. it is really only of use once the actual training has reached a certain
point  a hesitation in the wrong place then, or a doubt of what you have been told to do, can have
tragic consequences  but it is better to follow the discipline all the time. the accepted, on the other
hand, are expected to question things, as it is felt they know enough to know what questions to ask and
when. which do you think you would prefer?
nynaeves hands tightened on her skirt, and she looked at the tent flap again, frowning. finally she gave
a short nod and settled back down on the floor. i suppose i might as well, she said.
good, verin said. now. you already know this part, egwene, but for nynaeves sake i will take you
through it step by step. in time, it will become second nature  you will do it all faster than you can think
of it  but now it is best to go slowly. close your eyes, please. it goes better in the beginning if you have
no distractions at all. egwene closed her eyes. there was a pause. nynaeve, verin said, please close
your eyes. it will really go better. another pause. thank you, child. now, you must empty yourself.
empty your thoughts. there is only one thing in your mind. the bud of a flower. only that. only the bud.
you can see it in every detail. you can smell it. you can feel it. every vein of every leaf, every curve of
every petal. you can feel the sap pulsing. feel it. know it. be it. you and the bud are the same. you are
one. you are the bud.
her voice droned on hypnotically, but egwene no longer really heard; she had done this exercise before,
with moiraine. it was slow, but moiraine had said it would come more quickly with practice. inside
herself, she was a rosebud, red petals curled tightly. yet suddenly there was something else. light. light
pressing on the petals. slowly the petals unfolded, turning toward the light, absorbing the light. the rose
and the light were one. egwene and the light were one. she could feel the merest trickle of it seeping
through her. she stretched for more, strained for more . . .
in an instant it was all gone, rose and light. moiraine had also said it could not be forced. with a sigh,
she opened her eyes. nynaeve had a grim look on her face. verin was as calm as ever.
you cannotmake it happen, the aes sedai was saying. you mustlet it happen. you must surrender to
the power before you can control it.



this is complete foolishness, nynaeve muttered. i dont feel like a flower. if anything, i feel like a
blackthorn bush. i think i will wait by the fire after all.
as you wish, verin said. did i mention that novices do chores? they wash dishes, scrub floors, do
laundry, serve at table, all sorts of things. i myself think the servants do a better job of it by far, but it is
generally felt that such labor builds character. oh, you are staying? good. well, child, remember that
even a blackthorn bush has flowers sometimes, beautiful and white among the thorns. we will try it one at
a time. now, from the beginning, egwene. close your eyes.
several times before verin left, egwene felt the flow of the power through her, but it was never very
strong, and the most she managed with it was to produce a stir in the air that made the tent flap stir
slightly. she was sure a sneeze could have done as much. she had done better with moiraine; sometimes,
at least. she wished it was moiraine doing the teaching.
nynaeve never even felt a glimmer, or so she said. by the end her eyes were set and her mouth so tight
that egwene was afraid she was about to begin berating verin as if the aes sedai were a village woman
intruding on her privacy. but verin simply told her to close her eyes once again, this time without
egwene.
egwene was sitting, watching the other two between her yawns. the night had grown late, well past the
time she would usually be asleep. nynaeve wore a face like weekold death, her eyes clamped shut as if
she never meant to open them and her hands whiteknuckled fists in her lap. egwene hoped the
wisdoms temper did not break loose, not after she had held it this long.
feel the flow through you, verin was saying. her voice did not change, but suddenly there was a
gleam in her eyes. feel the flow. flow of the power. flow like a breeze, a gentle stirring in the air.
egwene sat up straight. this was how verin had guided her each time she had actually had the power
flowing through her. a soft breeze, the slightest movement of air. soft.
abruptly the stacked blankets burst into flame like fatwood.
nynaeve opened her eyes with a yell. egwene was not sure if she screamed or not. all egwene knew
was that she was on her feet, trying to kick the burning blankets outside before they set the tent on fire.
before she managed a second kick, the flames vanished, leaving wispy smoke rising from a charred mass
and the smell of burned wool.
well, verin said. well. i did not expect to have to douse a fire. dont faint on me, child. its all right
now. i took care of it.
i  i was angry. nynaeve spoke through trembling lips in a bloodless face. i heard you talking about
a breeze, telling me what to do, and fire just popped into my head. i  i didnt mean to burn anything. it
was just a small fire, in  in my head. she shuddered.
i suppose it was a small fire, at that. verin barked a laugh that was gone with another look at
nynaeves face. are you all right, child? if you feel ill, i can . . . nynaeve shook her head, and verin
nodded. rest is what you need. both of you. ive worked you too hard. you must rest. the amyrlin
will have us all up and away before first light. standing, she toed the charred blankets. i will have some
more blankets brought to you. i hope this shows both of you how important control is. you must learn to
do what you mean to do, and nothing more. aside from harming someone else, if you draw more of the
power than you can safely handle  and you cannot handle much, yet; but it will grow  if you draw



too much, you can destroy yourself. you can die. or you can burn yourself out, destroy what ability you
have. as if she had not told them they were walking a knife edge, she added a cheerful sleep well.
with that, she was gone.
egwene put her arms around nynaeve and hugged her tight. it is all right, nynaeve. there is no need to
be frightened. once you learn to control  
nynaeve gave a croaking laugh. i am not frightened. she glanced sideways at the smoking blankets
and twitched her eyes away. it takes more than a little fire to frighten me. but she did not look at the
blankets again, even when a warder came to take them away and leave new.
verin did not come again, as she had said she would not. indeed, as they journeyed on, south and west,
day by day, as fast as the footmen could move, verin paid the two women from emonds field no more
mind than moiraine did, than did any of the aes sedai. they were not precisely unfriendly, the aes
sedai, but rather distant and aloof, as if preoccupied. their coolness heightened egwenes unease, and
brought back all the tales she had heard as a child.
her mother had always told her the tales about aes sedai were a lot of fool mens nonsense, but neither
her mother nor any other woman in emonds field had ever met an aes sedai before moiraine came
there. she herself had spent a good deal of time with moiraine, and moiraine was proof to her that not all
aes sedai were like the tales. cold manipulators and merciless destroyers. breakers of the world. she
knew now thatthose , at least  the breakers of the world  had been male aes sedai, when there
were such, in the age of legends, but it did not help a great deal. not all aes sedai were like the tales,
but how many, and which?
the aes sedai who came to the tent each night were so mixed that they did not help at all in clearing her
thoughts. alviarin was as cool and businesslike as a merchant come to buy wool and tabac, surprised
that nynaeve was part of the lesson but accepting, sharp in her criticisms but always ready to try again.
alanna mosvani laughed and spent as much time talking about the world, and men, as she did teaching.
alanna showed too much interest in rand and perrin and mat for egwenes comfort, though. especially
rand. worst of all was liandrin, the only one who wore her shawl; the others had all packed them away
before leaving fal dara. liandrin sat fingering her red fringe and taught little, and reluctantly at that. she
questioned egwene and nynaeve as if they had been accused of a crime, and her questions were all
about the three boys. she kept it up until nynaeve threw her out  egwene was not sure why nynaeve
did so  and then she left with a warning.
watch yourselves, my daughters. you are in your village no longer. now you dabble your toes where
there are things to bite you.
finally the column reached the village of medo, on the banks of the mora, which ran along the border
between shienar and arafel and so into the river erinin.
egwene was sure it was the aes sedais questions about rand that had made her start dreaming of him,
that and worrying about him, about whether he and the others had had to follow the horn of valere into
the blight. the dreams were always bad, but at first they were just the ordinary sort of nightmare. by the
night they reached medo, the dreams had changed, though.
pardon, aes sedai, egwene asked diffidently, but have you seen moiraine sedai? the slender aes
sedai waved her away and hurried on down the crowded, torchlit village street, calling for someone to
be careful with her horse. the woman was of the yellow ajah, though not wearing her shawl now;
egwene knew no more of her than that, not even her name.



medo was a small village  though egwene was shocked to realize that what she now thought of as a
small village was as big as emonds field  and it was overwhelmed now with many more outsiders
than there were inhabitants. horses and people filled the narrow streets, jostling to the docks past
villagers who knelt whenever an unseeing aes sedai sped by. harsh torchlight lit everything. the two
docks jutted out into the river mora like stone fingers, and each hosted a pair of small, twomasted
ships. there, horses were being hoisted on board by booms and cables and canvas cradles under their
bellies. more of the ships  highsided and stout, with lanterns topping their masts  crowded the
moonstreaked river, already loaded or waiting their turn. rowboats ferried out archers and pikemen, the
raised pikes making the boats look like gigantic pricklebacks swimming on the surface.
on the lefthand dock egwene found anaiya, watching the loading and chivying those who were not
moving fast enough. though she had never said more than two words to egwene, anaiya seemed
different from the others, more like a woman from home. egwene could picture her baking in her kitchen;
she could not see any of the others so. anaiya sedai, have you seen moiraine sedai? i need to talk to
her.
the aes sedai looked around with an absent frown. what? oh, its you, child. moiraine is gone. and
your friend, nynaeve, is already out on theriver queen . i had to bundle her onto a boat myself,
shouting that she would not go without you. light, what a scramble! you should be aboard, yourself.
find a boat going out to theriver queen . you two will be traveling with the amyrlin seat, so mind
yourself once youre on board. no scenes or tantrums.
which ship is moiraine sedais?
moiraine isnt on a ship, girl. shes gone, two days gone, and the amyrlin is in a taking over it. anaiya
grimaced and shook her head, though most of her attention was still on the workers. first moiraine
vanishes with lan, then liandrin right on moiraines heels, and then verin, none of them with so much as
a word for anyone. verin did not even take her warder; tomas is chewing nails with worry over her.
the aes sedai glanced at the sky. the waxing moon shone without the hindrance of clouds. we will
have to call the wind again, and the amyrlin will not be pleased with that, either. she says she wants us
on our way to tar valon within an hour, and she will brook no delays. i would not want to be moiraine,
or liandrin, or verin, when she sees them next. theyll wish they were novices again. why, child, whats
the matter?
egwene drew a deep breath.moiraine gone? she cant be! i have to tell somebody, somebody who
wont laugh at me . she imagined anaiya back in emonds field, listening to her daughters problems;
the woman fit the picture. anaiya sedai, rand is in trouble.
anaiya gave her a considering look. that tall boy from your village? missing him already, are you?
well, i shouldnt be surprised if he is in trouble. young men his age usually are. though it was the other
one  mat?  who had the look of trouble. very well, child. i dont mean to mock you or make light.
what kind of trouble, and how do you know? he and lord ingtar must have the horn and be back in
fal dara by now. or else theyve had to follow it into the blight, and theres nothing to do about that.
i  i dont think theyre in the blight, or back in fal dara. i had a dream. she said it half defiantly. it
sounded silly when she said it, but it had seemed so real. a nightmare for true, but real. first there had
been a man with a mask over his face, and fire in place of his eyes. despite the mask, she had thought he
was surprised to see her. his look had frightened her till she thought her bones would break from
shivering, but suddenly he vanished, and she saw rand sleeping on the ground, wrapped in a cloak. a
woman had been standing over him, looking down. her face was in shadow, but her eyes seemed to



shine like the moon, and egwene had known she was evil. then there was a flash of light, and they were
gone. both of them. and behind it all, almost like another thing altogether, was the feel of danger, as if a
trap was just beginning to snap shut on an unsuspecting lamb, a trap with many jaws. as though time had
slowed, and she could watch the iron jaws creep closer together. the dream had not faded with waking,
the way dreams did. and the danger felt so strong she still wanted to look over her shoulder  only
somehow she knew that it was aimed at rand, not at her.
she wondered if the woman had been moiraine, and upbraided herself for the thought. liandrin fit that
part better. or perhaps alanna; she had been interested in rand, too.
she could not bring herself to tell anaiya. formally, she said, anaiya sedai, i know it sounds foolish,
but he is in danger. great danger. i know it. i could feel it. i still can.
anaiya wore a thoughtful look. well, now, she said softly, thats a possibility ill wager no one has
considered. you may be a dreamer. it is a small chance, child, but . . . we havent had one of those in
 oh  four or five hundred years. and dreaming is close linked to foretelling. if you really can
dream, it may be that you can foretell, as well.that would be a finger in the reds eye. of course, it
could be just an ordinary nightmare, brought on by a late night, and cold food, and us traveling so hard
since we left fal dara. and you missing your young man. much more likely. yes, yes, child, i know.
you are worried about him. did your dream indicate what kind of danger?
egwene shook her head. he just vanished, and i felt danger. and evil. i felt it even before he vanished.
she shivered and rubbed her hands together. i can still feel it.
well, we will talk about it more on theriver queen . if youare a dreamer, i will see you have the
training moiraine should be here to . . . you there! the aes sedai barked suddenly, and egwene
jumped. a tall man, who had just sat down on a cask of wine, jumped, too. several others quickened
their step. thats for loading aboard, not resting on! we will talk on the boat, child. no, you fool! you
cant carry it by yourself! do you want to hurt yourself? anaiya went striding off down the dock, giving
the unfortunate villagers a rougher side of her tongue than egwene would have suspected she had.
egwene peered into the dark, toward the south. he was out there, somewhere. not in fal dara, not in
the blight. she was sure of it.hold on, you woolheaded idiot. if you get yourself killed before i can
get you out of this, i willskin you alive . it did not occur to her to ask how she was going to get him out
of anything, going to tar valon as she was.
snugging her cloak around her, she set out to find a boat to theriver queen.

chapter 13

from stone to stone



the light of the rising sun woke rand, and he wondered if he were dreaming. he sat up slowly, staring.
everything had changed, or almost everything. the sun and the sky were as he expected to see, if pallid
and all but cloudless. loial and hurin still lay on either side of him, wrapped in their cloaks asleep, and
their horses still stood hobbled a pace away, but everyone else was gone. soldiers, horses, his friends,
everyone and everything gone.
the hollow itself had changed, too, and they were in the middle of it now, no longer on the edge. at
rands head rose a gray stone cylinder, every bit of three spans high and a full pace thick, covered with
hundreds, perhaps thousands, of deeply incised diagrams and markings in some language he did not
recognize. white stone paved the bottom of the hollow, as level as a floor, polished so smooth it almost
glistened. broad, high steps rose to the rim in concentric rings of different colored stone. and about the
rim, the trees stood blackened and twisted as if a firestorm had roared through them. everything seemed
paler than it should be, just like the sun, more subdued, as if seen through mist. only there was no mist.
just the three of them and the horses appeared truly solid. but when he touched the stone under him, it
felt solid enough.
he reached out and shook loial and hurin. wake up! wake up and tell me im dreaming. please
wake up!
is it morning already? loial began, sitting up, then his mouth fell open, and his big, round eyes grew
wider and wider.
hurin woke with a start, then leaped to his feet, jumping like a flea on a hot rock to look this way, then
that. where are we? whats happened? where is everybody? where are we, lord rand? he sank to
his knees, wringing his hands, but his eyes still darted. whats happened?
i dont know, rand said slowly. i was hoping it was a dream, but . . . maybe it is a dream. he had
had experience of dreams that were not dreams, experience he wanted neither to repeat nor to
remember. he stood up carefully. everything stayed as it was.
i do not think so, loial said. he was studying the column, and he did not appear happy. his long
eyebrows sagged across his cheeks, and his tufted ears seemed to have wilted. i think this is the same
stone we went to sleep beside last night. i think i know what it is, now. for once, he sounded miserable
about knowing.
thats . . .no . that being the same stone was no more crazy than what he could see around him, mat
and perrin and the shienarans gone, and everything changed.i thought id escaped, but its started
again, and theres no such thing as crazy anymore. unless i am . he looked at loial and hurin.
they were not acting as if he were mad; they saw it, too. something about the steps caught his eye, the
different colors, seven rising from blue to red. one for each ajah, he said.
no, lord rand, hurin moaned. no. aes sedai would not do this to us. they wouldnt! i walk in the
light.
we all do, hurin, rand said. the aes sedai wont hurt you.unless you get in the way . could this
be moiraines doing somehow? loial, you said you know what the stone is. what is it?
i said i think i know, rand. there was a piece of an old book, just a few pages, but one of them had a



drawing of this stone, this stone  there was a distinct difference in the way he said it that marked
importance  or one very like it. and underneath, it said, from stone to stone run the lines of if,
between the worlds that might be.
what does that mean, loial? it doesnt make any sense.
the ogier shook his massive head sadly. it was only a few pages. part of it said aes sedai in the age
of legends, some of those who could travel, the most powerful of them, could use these stones. it did
not say how, but i think, from what i could puzzle out, that perhaps those aes sedai used the stones
somehow to journey to those worlds. he glanced up at the seared trees and pulled his eyes down again
quickly, as he did not want to think about what lay beyond the rim. yet even if aes sedai can use them,
or could, we had no aes sedai with us to channel the power, so i dont see how it can be.
rands skin prickled.aes sedai used them. in the age of legends, when there were male aes sedai
. he had a vague memory of the void closing round him as he fell asleep, filled with that uneasy glow.
and he remembered the room in the village, and the light he had reached for to escape.if that was the
male half of true source . . .no, it cant be. but what if it is? light, i was wondering whether to
run or not, and all the time its right inside my head. maybe i brought us here . he did not want to
think about it. worlds that might be? i dont understand, loial.
the ogier shrugged massively, and uneasily. neither do i, rand. most of it sounded like this. if a
woman go left, or right, does times flow divide? does the wheel then weave two patterns? a
thousand, for each of her turnings? as many as the stars? is one real, the others merely shadows and
reflections? you see, it was not very clear. mainly questions, most of which seemed to contradict each
other. and there just wasnt much of it. he went back to staring at the column, but he looked as if he
wished it would go away. there are supposed to be a good many of these stones, scattered all over the
world, or there were, once, but i never heard of anyone finding one. i never heard of anyone finding
anything like this at all.
my lord rand? now on his feet, hurin seemed calmer, but he clutched his coat at the waist with both
hands, his face urgent. my lord rand, youll get us back, wont you? back where we belong? ive a
wife, my lord, and children. meliad take it bad enough, me dying, but if she doesnt even have my body
to give to the mothers embrace, shell grieve to the end of her days. you understand, my lord. i cant
leave her not knowing. youll get us back. and if i die, if you cant take her my body, youll let her
know, so she has that, at least. he was no longer questioning at the end. a note of confidence had crept
into his voice.
rand opened his mouth to say again he was not a lord, then shut it without speaking. that was hardly
important enough to mention, now.you got him into this . he wanted to deny it, but he knew what he
was, knew he could channel, even if it always seemed to happen all by itself. loial said aes sedai used
the stones, and that meant the one power. what loial said he knew, you could be sure of  the ogier
never claimed to know if he did not  and there was no one else nearby who could wield the power.
you got him into it, you have to get him out. you have to try.
i will do my best, hurin. and because hurin was shienaran, he added, by my house and honor. a
shepherds house and a shepherds honor, but ill make them do as well as a lords.
hurin loosed his hold on his coat. the confidence reached his eyes, too. he bowed deeply. honor to
serve, my lord.
guilt rippled through rand.he thinks youll see him home, now, because shienaran lords always



keep their word. what are you going to do , lordrand? none of that, hurin. therell be no bowing.
im not   suddenly he knew he could not tell the man again that he was not a lord. all that was
holding the sniffer together was his belief in a lord, and he could not take that away, not now. not here.
no bowing, he finished awkwardly.
as you say, lord rand. hurins grin was almost as wide as when rand first met him.
rand cleared his throat. yes. well, thats what i say.
they were both watching him, loial curious, hurin confident, both waiting to see what he would do.i
brought them here. i must have. so i have to get them back. and that means . . .
drawing a deep breath, he walked across the white paving stones to the symbolcovered cylinder. small
lines of some language he did not know surrounded each symbol, odd letters that flowed in curves and
spirals, suddenly turned to jagged hooks and angles, then flowed on. at least it was not trolloc script.
reluctantly, he put his hands on the column. it looked like any dry, polished stone, but it felt curiously
slick, like oiled metal.
he closed his eyes and formed the flame. the void came slowly, hesitantly. he knew his own fear was
holding it back, fear of what he was trying. as fast as he fed fear into the flame, more came.i cant do it.
channel the power. i dont want to. light, there has to be another way . grimly he forced the
thoughts to stillness. he could feel sweat beading on his face. determinedly he kept on, pushing his fears
into the consuming flame, making it grow, and grow. and the void was there.
the core of him floated in emptiness. he could see the light saidin  even with his eyes closed, feel
the warmth of it, surrounding him, surrounding everything, suffusing everything. it wavered like a candle
flame seen through oiled paper. rancid oil. stinking oil.
he reached for it  he was not surehow he reached, but it was something, a movement, a stretching
toward the light, towardsaidin  and caught nothing, as if running his hands through water. it felt like a
slimy pond, scum floating atop clean water below, but he could not scoop up any of the water. time and
again it trickled through his fingers, not even droplets of the water remaining, only the slick scum, making
his skin crawl.
desperately, he tried to form an image of the hollow as it had been, with ingtar and the lances sleeping
by their horses, with mat and perrin, and the stone lying buried except for one end. outside the void he
formed it, clinging to the shell of emptiness that enclosed him. he tried to link the image with the light,
tried to force them together. the hollow as it had been, and he and loial and hurin there together. his
head hurt. together, with mat and perrin and the shienarans. burning, in his head. together!
the void shattered into a thousand razor shards, slicing his mind.
shuddering, he staggered back, wideeyed. his hands hurt from pressing the stone, and his arms and
shoulders quivered with aching; his stomach lurched from the feel of filth covering him, and his head . . .
he tried to steady his breathing. that had never happened before. when the void went, it went like a
pricked bubble, just gone, in a twinkling. never broken like glass. his head felt numb, as if the thousand
slashes had happened so quickly the pain had not yet come. but every cut had felt as real as if done with
a knife. he touched his temple, and was surprised not to see blood on his fingers.
hurin still stood there watching him, still confident. if anything, the sniffer seemed more sure by the
minute. lord rand was doing something. that was what lords were for. they protected the land and the



people with their bodies and their lives, and when something was wrong, they set it aright and saw
fairness and justice done. as long as rand was doing something, anything, hurin would have confidence
that it would all come right in the end. that was what lords did.
loial had a different look, a slightly puzzled frown, but his eyes were on rand, too. rand wondered
what he was thinking.
it was worth a try, he told them. the rancid oil feel, inside his head light, its inside me! i dont
want it inside me!  was fading slowly, but he still thought he might vomit. i will try again, in a few
minutes.
he hoped he sounded confident. he had no idea how the stones worked, if what he was doing had any
chance of success.maybe there are rules for working them. maybe you have to do something
special. light, maybe you cant use the same stone twice, or . . . he cut off that line of thought. there
was no good in thinking like that. he had it to do. looking at loial and hurin, he thought he knew what
lan had meant about duty pressing down like a mountain.
my lord, i think . . . hurin let his words trail off, looking abashed for a moment. my lord, maybe, if
we find the darkfriends, we can make one of them tell us how to get back.
i would ask a darkfriend or the dark one himself if i thought id get a true answer back, rand said.
but we are all there is. just us three.just me. im the one who has to do it.
we could follow their trail, my lord. if we catch them . . .
rand stared at the sniffer. you can still smell them?
i can, my lord. hurin frowned. its faint, pale  like, like everything else here, but i can smell the
trail. right up there. he pointed to the rim of the hollow. i dont understand it, my lord, but  last
night, i could have sworn the trail went right on by the hollow back  back where we were. well, its in
the same place now, only here, and fainter, like i said. not old, not faint like that, but . . . i dont know,
lord rand, except that its there.
rand considered. if fain and the darkfriends were here  wherever here was  they might know how
to get back. they had to, if they had reached here in the first place. and they had the horn, and the
dagger. mat had to have that dagger. for that if for nothing else, he had to find them. what finally
decided him, he was ashamed to realize, was that he was afraid to try again. afraid to try channeling the
power. he was less afraid of confronting darkfriends and trollocs with only hurin and loial than he was
of that.
then we will go after the darkfriends. he tried to sound sure, the way lan would, or ingtar. the
horn must be recovered. if we cant puzzle out a way to take it from them, at least we will know where
they are when we find ingtar again.if only they dont ask how were going to find him again .
hurin, make sure it really is the trail were after.
the sniffer leaped into his saddle, eager to be doing something himself, perhaps eager to be away from
the hollow, and scrambled his horse up the broad, colored steps. the animals hooves rang loudly on the
stone, but they made not a mark.
rand stowed reds hobbles in his saddlebags  the banner was still there; he would not have minded if
that had been left behind  then gathered his bow and quiver and climbed to the stallions back. the



bundle of thom merrilins cloak made a mound behind his saddle.
loial led his big mount over to him; with the ogier standing on the ground, loials head came almost to
rands shoulder, and him in his saddle. loial still looked puzzled.
you think we should stay here? rand said. try again to use the stone? if the darkfriends are here, in
place, we have to find them. we cant leave the horn of valere in darkfriend hands; you heard the
amyrlin. and we have to get that dagger back. mat will die without it.
loial nodded. yes, rand, we do. but, rand, the stones . . . 
we will find another. you said they were scattered all over, and if theyre all like this  all this
stonework around them  it should not be too hard to find one.
rand, that fragment said the stones came from an older age than the age of legends, and even the
aes sedai then did not understand them, though they used them, some of the truly powerful did. they
used them with the one power, rand. how did you think to use this stone to take us back? or any
other stone we find?
for a moment rand could only stare at the ogier, thinking faster than he ever had in his life. if they are
older than the age of legends, maybe the people who built them didnt use the power. there must be
another way. the darkfriends got here, and they certainly couldnt use the power. whatever this other
way is, i will find it out. i will get us back, loial. he looked at the tall stone column with its odd
markings, and felt a prickle of fear.light, if only i donthave to use the power to do it . i will, loial, i
promise. one way or another.
the ogier gave a doubtful nod. he swung up onto his huge horse and followed rand up the steps to join
hurin among the blackened trees.
the land stretched out, low and rolling, sparsely forested here and there with grassland between,
crossed by more than one stream. in the middle distance rand thought he could see another burned
patch. it was all pale, the colors washed. there was no sign of anything made by men except the stone
circle behind them. the sky was empty, no chimney smoke, no birds, only a few clouds and the pale
yellow sun.
worst of all, though, the land seemed to twist the eye. what was close at hand looked all right, and what
was seen straight ahead in the distance. but whenever rand turned his head, things that appeared distant
when seen from the corner of his eye seemed to rush toward him, to be nearer when he stared straight at
them. it made for dizziness; even the horses whickered nervously and rolled their eyes. he tried moving
his head slowly; the apparent movement of things that should have been fixed was still there, but it
seemed to help a little.
did your piece of a book say anything about this? rand asked.
loial shook his head, then swallowed hard as if he wished he had kept it still. nothing.
i suppose theres nothing to do for it. which way, hurin?
south, lord rand. the sniffer kept his eyes on the ground.
south, then.there has to be a way back besides using the power . rand heeled reds flanks. he



tried to make his voice lighthearted, as if he saw no difficulty at all in what they were about. what was it
ingtar said? three or four days to that monument to artur hawkwing? i wonder if that exists here, too,
the way the stones do. if this is a world thatcould be, maybe its still standing. wouldnt that be
something to see, loial?
they rode south.

chapter 14

wolf brother

gone? ingtar demanded of the air. and my guards saw nothing. nothing! they cannot just be gone!
listening, perrin hunched his shoulders and looked at mat, who stood a little way off frowning and
muttering to himself. arguing with himself was how perrin saw it. the sun was peeking over the horizon,
past time for them to have been riding. shadows lay long across the hollow, stretched out and thinned,
but still like the trees that made them. the packhorses, loaded and on their lead line, stamped impatiently,
but everyone stood by his mount and waited.
uno came striding up. not a goatkissing track, my lord. he sounded offended; failure touched on his
skill. burn me, not so much as a flaming hoof scrape. they just bloody vanished.
three men and three horses do not just vanish, ingtar growled. go over the ground again, uno. if
anyone can find where they went, its you.
maybe they just ran away, mat said. uno stopped and glared at him.like hed cursed an aes sedai ,
perrin thought wonderingly.
why would they run away? ingtars voice was dangerously soft. rand, the builder, my sniffer  my
sniffer!  why would any of them run, much less all three?
mat shrugged. i dont know. rand was . . . perrin wanted to throw something at him, hit him, anything
to stop him, but ingtar and uno were watching. he felt a flood of relief when mat hesitated, then spread
his hands and muttered, i dont know why. i just thought maybe they had.
ingtar grimaced. ran away, he growled as if he did not believe it for an instant. the builder can go as
he will, but hurin would not run away. and neither would rand althor. he would not; he knows his
duty, now. go on, uno. search the ground again. uno gave a half bow and hurried away, sword hilt
bobbing over his shoulder. ingtar grumbled, why would hurin leave like that, in the middle of the night,



without a word? he knows what were about. how am i to track this shadowspawned filth without
him? i would give a thousand gold crowns for a pack of trail hounds. if i did not know better, i would
say the darkfriends managed this so they can slip east or west without me knowing. peace, i dont know
if ido know better. he stumped off after uno.
perrin shifted uneasily. the darkfriends were doubtless getting further away with every minute. getting
further away, and with them the horn of valere  and the dagger from shadar logoth. he did not think
that rand, whatever he had become, whatever had happened to him, would abandon that chase.but
where didhe go, and why? loial might go with rand for friendship  but why hurin?
maybe he did run away, he muttered, then looked around. no one appeared to have heard; even mat
was not paying him any mind. he scrubbed a hand through his hair. if aes sedai had been after him to be
a false dragon, he would have run, too. but worrying about rand was doing nothing to help track the
darkfriends.
there was a way, perhaps, if he was willing to take it. he did not want to take it. he had been running
away from it, but perhaps, now, he could no longer run.serves me right for what i told rand. i wish i
couldrun . even knowing what he could do to help  what he had to do  he hesitated.
no one was looking at him. no one would know what they were seeing even if they did look. finally,
reluctantly, he closed his eyes and let himself drift, let his thoughts drift, out, away from him.
he had tried denying it from the first, long before his eyes began to change from dark brown to
burnished golden yellow. at that first meeting, that first instant of recognition, he had refused to believe,
and he had run from the recognition ever since. he still wanted to run.
his thoughts drifted, feeling for what must be out there, what was always out there in country where men
were few or far between, feeling for his brothers. he did not like to think of them that way, but they
were.
in the beginning he had been afraid that what he did had some taint of the dark one, or of the one
power  equally bad for a man who wanted nothing more than to be a blacksmith and live his life in the
light, and in peace. from that time, he knew something of how rand felt, afraid of himself, feeling
unclean. he was still not past that entirely. this thing he did was older than humans using the one power,
though, something from the birth of time. not the power, moiraine had told him. something long
vanished, now come again. egwene knew, too, though he wished she did not. he wished no one did. he
hoped she had not told anyone.
contact. he felt them, felt other minds. felt his brothers, the wolves.
their thoughts came to him as a whirlpool blend of images and emotions. at first he had not been able to
make out anything except the raw emotion, but now his mind put words to them.wolfbrother. surprise.
twolegs that talks . a faded image, dim with time, old beyond old, of men running with wolves, two
packs hunting together.we have heard this comes again. you are long tooth?
it was a faint picture of a man dressed in clothes made of hides, with a long knife in his hand, but
overlaid on the image, more central, was a shaggy wolf with one tooth longer than the rest, a steel tooth
gleaming in the sunlight as the wolf led the pack in a desperate charge through deep snow toward the
deer that would mean life instead of slow death by starvation, and the deer thrashing to run in powder to
their bellies, and the sun glinting on the white until it hurt the eyes, and the wind howling down the passes,
swirling the fine snow like mist, and . . . wolves names were always complex images.



perrin recognized the man. elyas machera, who had first introduced him to wolves. sometimes he
wished he had never met elyas.
no, he thought, and tried to picture himself in his mind.
yes. we have heard of you.
it was not the image he had made, a young man with heavy shoulders and shaggy, brown curls, a young
man with an axe at his belt, who others thought moved and thought slowly. that man was there,
somewhere in the mind picture that came from the wolves, but stronger by far was a massive, wild bull
with curved horns of shining metal, running through the night with the speed and exuberance of youth,
curlyhaired coat gleaming in the moonlight, flinging himself in among whitecloaks on their horses, with
the air crisp and cold and dark, and blood so red on the horns, and . . .
young bull.
for a moment perrin lost the contact in his shock. he had not dreamed they had given him a name. he
wished he could not remember how he had earned it. he touched the axe at his belt, with its gleaming,
halfmoon blade.light help me, i killed two men. they would have killed me even quicker, and
egwene, but . . .
pushing all that aside  it was done and behind him; he had no wish to remember any of it  he gave
the wolves the smell of rand, of loial and hurin, and asked if they had scented the three. it was one of
the things that had come to him with the change in his eyes; he could identify people by their smell even
when he could not see them. he could see more sharply, too, see in anything but pitchdarkness. he was
always careful to light lamps or candles, now, sometimes before anyone else thought they were needed.
from the wolves came a view of men on horses approaching the hollow in late day. that was the last
they had seen or smelled of rand or the other two.
perrin hesitated. the next step would be useless unless he told ingtar.and mat will die if we dont find
that dagger. burn you, rand, why did you take the sniffer?
the one time he had gone to the dungeon, with egwene, the smell of fain had made his hair stand on
end; not even trollocs smelled so foul. he had wanted to rip through the bars of the cell and tear the man
apart, and finding that inside himself had frightened him more than fain did. to mask fains smell in his
own mind, he added the scent of trollocs before he howled aloud.
from the distance came the cries of a wolfpack, and in the hollow horses stamped and whickered
fearfully. some of the soldiers fingered their longbladed lances and eyed the rim of the hollow uneasily.
inside perrins head, it was much worse. he felt the rage of the wolves, the hate. there were only two
things wolves hated. all else they merely endured, but fire and trollocs they hated, and they would go
through fire to kill trollocs.
even more than the trollocs, fains scent had put them into a frenzy, as if they smelled something that
made trollocs seem natural and right.
where?
the sky rolled in his head; the land spun. east and west, wolves did not know. they knew the



movements of sun and moon, the shift of seasons, the contours of the land. perrin puzzled it out. south.
and something more. an eagerness to kill the trollocs. the wolves would let young bull share in the
killing. he could bring the twolegs with their hard skins if he wanted, but young bull, and smoke, and
two deer, and winter dawn, and all the rest of the pack would hunt down the twisted ones who had
dared come into their land. the inedible flesh and bitter blood would burn the tongue, but they must be
killed. kill them. kill the twisted ones.
their fury infected him. his lips peeled back in a snarl, and he took a step, to join them, run with them in
the hunt, in the killing.
with an effort he broke the contact except for a thin sense that the wolves were there. he could have
pointed to them across the intervening distance. he felt cold inside.im a man, not a wolf. light help
me, i am a man!
are you well, perrin? mat said, moving closer. he sounded the way he always did, flippant  and
bitter under it, too, of late  but he looked worried. that is all i need. rand run off, and then you get
sick. i dont know where ill find a wisdom to look after you out here. i think i have some willowbark in
my saddlebags. i can make you some willowbark tea, if ingtar lets us stay that long. serve you right if i
make it too strong.
i . . . im all right, mat. shaking off his friend, he went to find ingtar. the shienaran lord was scanning
the ground on the rim with uno, and ragan, and masema. the others frowned at him as he drew ingtar
aside. he made sure uno and the rest were too far away to hear before he spoke. i dont know where
rand or the others went, ingtar, but padan fain and the trollocs  and i guess the rest of the
darkfriends  are still heading south.
how do you know this? ingtar said.
perrin drew a deep breath. wolves told me. he waited, for what he was not sure. laughter, scorn, an
accusation of being a darkfriend, of being mad. deliberately, he tucked his thumbs behind his belt, away
from the axe.i will not kill. not again. if he tries to kill me for a darkfriend, iii run, but i wont
kill anybody else.
i have heard of things like this, ingtar said slowly, after a moment. rumors. there was a warder, a
man called elyas machera, who some said could talk to wolves. he disappeared years ago. he seemed
to catch something in perrins eyes. you know him?
i know him, perrin said flatly. hes the one . . . i dont want to talk about it. i didnt ask for it.
thats what rand said. light, i wish i were home working master luhhans forge.
these wolves, ingtar said, they will track the darkfriends and trollocs for us? perrin nodded.
good. i will have the horn, whatever it takes. the shienaran glanced around at uno and the others still
searching for tracks. better not to tell anyone else, though. wolves are considered good luck in the
borderlands. trollocs fear them. but still, better to keep this between us for the time. some of them
might not understand.
i would as soon nobody else ever found out, perrin said.
i will tell them you think you have hurins talent. they know about that; theyre easy with it. some of
them saw you wrinkling your nose back in that village, and at the ferry. ive heard jokes about your
delicate nose. yes. you keep us on the trail today, uno will see enough of their tracks to confirm it is the



trail, and before nightfall every last man will be sure you are a sniffer. iwill have the horn. he glanced at
the sky, and raised his voice. daylight is wasting! to horse!
to perrins surprise, the shienarans seemed to accept ingtars story. a few of them looked skeptical 
masema went so far as to spit  but uno nodded thoughtfully, and that was enough for most. mat was
the hardest to convince.
a sniffer! you? youre going to track murderers by smell? perrin, you are as crazy as rand. i am the
only sane one left from emonds field, with egwene and nynaeve trotting off to tar valon to become
  he cut himself short with an uneasy glance for the shienarans.
perrin took hurins place beside ingtar as the small column rode south. mat kept up a string of
disparaging remarks, until uno found the first tracks left by trollocs and by men on horses, but perrin
paid him little mind. it was all he could do to keep the wolves from dashing on ahead to kill the trollocs.
the wolves cared only about killing the twisted ones; to them, darkfriends were no different from any
other twolegs. perrin could almost see the darkfriends scattering in a dozen directions while the wolves
slew trollocs, running away with the horn of valere. running away with the dagger. and once the
trollocs were dead, he did not think he could interest the wolves in tracking the humans even if he had
any idea which of them to track. he had a running argument with them, and sweat covered his forehead
long before he got the first flash of images that turned his stomach.
he drew rein, stopping his horse dead. the others did the same, looking at him, waiting. he stared
straight ahead and cursed softly, bitterly.
wolves would kill men, but men were not a preferred prey. wolves remembered the old hunting
together, for one thing, and twolegs tasted bad, for another. wolves were more particular about their
food than he would have believed. they would not eat carrion, unless they were starving, and few would
kill more than they could eat. what perrin felt from the wolves could best be described as disgust. and
there were the images. he could see them much more clearly than he wished. bodies, men and women
and children, heaped and tumbled about. bloodsoaked earth churned by hooves and frenzied attempts
to escape. torn flesh. heads severed. vultures flapping, their white wings stained red; bloody,
featherless heads tearing and gorging. he broke loose before his stomach emptied itself.
above some trees in the far distance he could just make out black specks whirling low, dropping then
rising again. vultures fighting over their meal.
theres something bad up there. he swallowed, meeting ingtars gaze. how could he fit telling them
into the story of being a sniffer?i dont want to get close enough to look at that. but theyll want to
investigate once they can see the vultures. i have to tell them enough so theyll circle around .
the people from that village . . . i think the trollocs killed them.
uno began cursing quietly, and some of the other shienarans muttered to themselves. none of them
seemed to take his announcement as odd, though. lord ingtar said he was a sniffer, and sniffers could
smell killing.
and there is someone following us, ingtar said.
mat turned his horse eagerly. maybe its rand. i knew he wouldnt run out on me.
thin, scattered puffs of dust rose to the north; a horse was running across patches where the grass grew
thin. the shienarans spread out, lances ready, watching in all directions. it was no place to be casual



about a stranger.
a speck appeared  a horse and rider; a woman, to perrins eyes, long before anyone else could
discern the rider  and quickly drew closer. she slowed to a trot as she came up on them, fanning
herself with one hand. a plump, graying woman, with her cloak tied behind her saddle, who blinked at
them all vaguely.
thats one of the aes sedai, mat said disappointedly. i recognize her. verin.
verin sedai, ingtar said sharply, then bowed to her from his saddle.
moiraine sedai sent me, lord ingtar, verin announced with a satisfied smile. she thought you might
need me. such a gallop ive had. i thought i might not catch you short of cairhien. you saw that village,
of course? oh, that was very nasty, wasnt it? and that myrddraal. there were ravens and crows all
over the rooftops, but never a one went near it, dead as it was. i had to wave away the dark ones own
weight in flies, though, before i could make out what it was. a shame i did not have time to take it down.
ive never had a chance to study a   suddenly her eyes narrowed, and the absent manner vanished
like smoke. where is rand althor?
ingtar grimaced. gone, verin sedai. vanished last night, without a trace. him, the ogier, and hurin,
one of my men.
the ogier, lord ingtar? and your sniffer went with him? what would those two have in common with .
. .? ingtar gaped at her, and she snorted. did you think you could keep something like that secret?
she snorted again. sniffers. vanished, you say?
yes, verin sedai. ingtar sounded unsettled. it was never easy discovering aes sedai knew the secrets
you were trying to keep from them; perrin hoped moiraine had not told anyone about him. but i have
 i have a new sniffer. the shienaran lord gestured to perrin. this man seems to have the ability,
also. i will find the horn of valere, as i swore to, have no fear. your company will be welcome, aes
sedai, if you wish to ride with us. to perrins surprise, he did not sound as if he entirely meant it.
verin glanced at perrin, and he shifted uneasily. a new sniffer, just when you lose your old one. how . .
. providential. you found no tracks? no, of course not. you said no trace. odd. last night. she twisted
in her saddle, looking back north, and for a moment perrin almost thought she was going to ride back the
way she had come.
ingtar frowned at her. you think their disappearance has something to do with the horn, aes sedai?
verin settled back. the horn? no. no, i . . . think not. but it is odd. very odd. i do not like odd
things until i can understand them.
i can have two men escort you back to where they disappeared, verin sedai. they will have no trouble
taking you right to it.
no. if you say they vanished without a trace . . . for a long moment she studied ingtar, her face
unreadable. i will ride with you. perhaps we will find them again, or they will find us. talk to me as we
ride, lord ingtar. tell me everything you can about the young man. everything he did, everything he
said.
they started off in a jingle of harness and armor, verin riding close beside ingtar and questioning him



closely, but too low to be overheard. she gave perrin a look when he tried to maintain his place, and he
fell back.
its rand shes after, mat murmured, not the horn.
perrin nodded.wherever youve gotten to, rand, stay there. its safer than here.

chapter 15

kinslayer

the way the strangely faded distant hills seemed to slide toward rand when he looked straight at them
made his head spin, unless he wrapped himself in the void. sometimes the emptiness crept up on him
unawares, but he avoided it like death. better to be dizzy than share the void with that uneasy light. better
by far to stare at the faded land. still, he tried not to look at anything too far away unless it lay right ahead
of them.
hurin wore a fixed look as he concentrated on sniffing the trail, as if he were trying to ignore the land the
trail crossed. when the sniffer did notice what lay around them, he would give a start and wipe his hands
on his coat, then push his nose forward like a hound, eyes glazing, excluding everything else. loial rode
slumped in his saddle and frowned as he glanced around, ears twitching uneasily, muttering to himself.
again they crossed land blackened and burned, even the soil crunching under the horses hooves as if it
had been seared. the burned swathes, sometimes a mile wide, sometimes only a few hundred paces, all
ran east and west as straight as an arrows flight. twice rand saw the end of a burn, once as they rode
over it, once as they passed nearby; they tapered to points at the ends. at least, the ends he saw were
so, but he suspected they were all the same.
once he had watched whatley eldin decorate a cart for sunday, back home in emonds field, what
painting the scenes in bright colors, and the intricate scrollwork that surrounded them. for the borders,
what let the point of his brush touch the cart, making a thin line that grew thicker as he pressed harder,
then thinner again as he eased up. that was how the land looked, as if someone had streaked it with a
monstrous brush of fire.
nothing grew where the burns were, though some burns, at least, had the feel of a thing long done. not
so much as a hint of char remained in the air there, not a whiff even when he leaned down to break off a
black twig and smell it. old, yet nothing had come in to reclaim the land. black gave way to green, and
green to black, along knifeedge lines.



in its own way, the rest of the land lay as dead as the burns, though grass covered the ground and leaves
covered the trees. everything had that faded look, like clothes too often washed and too long left in the
sun. there were no birds or animals, not that rand saw or heard. no hawk wheeling in the sky, no bark
of a hunting fox, no bird singing. nothing rustled in the grass or lit on a tree branch. no bees, or
butterflies. several times they crossed streams, the water shallow, though often it had dug itself a deep
gulley with steep banks the horses had to scramble down and climb on the other side. the water ran
clear except for the mud the horses hooves stirred, but never a minnow or tadpole wriggled out of the
roiling, not even a waterspider dancing across the surface, or a hovering lacewing.
the water was drinkable, which was just as well, since their waterbottles could not last forever. rand
tasted it first, and made loial and hurin wait to see if anything happened to him before he let them drink.
he had gotten them into this; it was his responsibility. the water was cool and wet, but that was the best
that could be said for it. it tasted flat, as if it had been boiled. loial made a face, and the horses did not
like it either, shaking their heads and drinking reluctantly.
there was one sign of life; at least, rand thought it must be so. twice he saw a wispy streak crawling
across the sky like a line drawn with cloud. the lines were too straight to be natural, it seemed, but he
could not imagine what might make them. he did not mention the lines to the others. perhaps they did not
see, hurin intent on the trail as he was and loial drawn in on himself. they said nothing of the lines, at
any rate.
when they had ridden half the morning, loial abruptly swung down from his huge horse without a word
and strode to a stand of giantsbroom, their trunks splitting into many thick branches, stiff and straight, not
a pace above the ground. at the top, all split again, into the leafy brush that gave them their name.
rand pulled red up and started to ask what he was doing, but something about the ogiers manner, as
if he himself were uncertain, kept rand silent. after staring at the tree, loial put his hands on a trunk and
began to sing in a deep, soft rumble.
rand had heard ogier treesong, once, when loial had sung to a dying tree and brought it back to life,
and he had heard of sung wood, objects wrought from trees by the treesong. the talent was fading,
loial said; he was one of the few who had the ability, now; that was what made sung wood even more
sought after and treasured. when he had heard loial sing before, it had been as if the earth itself sang,
but now the ogier murmured his song almost diffidently, and the land echoed it in a whisper.
it seemed pure song, music without words, at least none that rand could make out; if there were words,
they faded into the music just as water pours into a stream. hurin gasped and stared.
rand was not sure what it was loial did, or how; soft as the song was, it caught him up hypnotically,
filling his mind almost the way the void did. loial ran his big hands along the trunk, singing, caressing with
his voice as well as his fingers. the trunk now seemed smoother, somehow, as if his stroking were
shaping it. rand blinked. he was sure the piece loial worked on had had branches at its top just like the
others, but now it stopped in a rounded end right above the ogiers head. rand opened his mouth, but
the song quieted him. it seemed so familiar, that song, as if he should know it.
abruptly loials voice rose to a climax  almost a hymn of thanks, it sounded  and ended, fading as
a breeze fades.
burn me, hurin breathed. he looked stunned. burn me, i never heard anything like . . . burn me.
in his hands loial held a staff as tall as he was and as thick as rands forearm, smooth and polished.



where the trunk had been on the giantsbroom was a small stem of new growth.
rand took a deep breath.always something new, always something i didnt expect, and sometimes
it isnt horrible.
he watched loial mount, resting the staff across his saddle in front of him, and wondered why the ogier
wanted a staff at all, since they were riding. then he saw the thick rod, not as big as it was, but in relation
to the ogier, saw the way loial handled it. a quarterstaff, he said, surprised. i didnt know ogier
carried weapons, loial.
usually we do not, the ogier replied almost curtly. usually. the price has always been too high. he
hefted the huge quarterstaff and wrinkled his broad nose with distaste. elder haman would surely say i
am putting a long handle on my axe, but i am not just being hasty or rash, rand. this place . . . he
shivered, and his ears twitched.
well find our way back soon, rand said, trying to sound confident.
loial spoke as if he had not heard. everything is . . . linked, rand. whether it lives or not, whether it
thinks or not, everything thatis , fits together. the tree does not think, but it is part of the whole, and the
whole has a  a feeling. i cant explain any more than i can explain what being happy is, but . . . rand,
this land was glad for a weapon to be made. glad!
the light shine on us, hurin murmured nervously, and the creators hand shelter us. though we go
to the last embrace of the mother, the light illumine our way. he kept repeating the catechism as if it had
a charm to protect him.
rand resisted the impulse to look around. he definitely did not look up. all it would take to break them
all was another of those smoky lines across the sky right at that moment. theres nothing here to hurt
us, he said firmly. and well keep a good watch and make sure nothing does.
he wanted to laugh at himself, sounding so certain. he was not certain about anything. but watching the
others  loial with his tufted ears drooping, and hurin trying not to look at anything  he knew one of
them had to seem to be sure, at least, or fear and uncertainty would break them all apart.the wheel
weaves as the wheel wills . he squeezed that thought out.nothing to do with the wheel. nothing to
with taveren,or aes sedai, or the dragon. its just the way it is, thats all.
loial, are you done here? the ogier nodded, regretfully rubbing the quarterstaff. rand turned to
hurin. do you still have the trail?
i do, lord rand. i do that.
then lets keep on with it. once we find fain and the darkfriends, why, well go home heroes, with the
dagger for mat, and the horn of valere. lead out, hurin.heroes? ill settle for all of us getting out
of here alive.
i do not like this place, the ogier announced flatly. he held the quarterstaff as if he expected to have
to use it soon.
as well we dont mean to stay here, then, isnt it? rand said. hurin barked a laugh as if he had made a
joke, but loial gave him a level look.



as well we dont, rand.
yet as they rode on southward, he could see that his casual assumption that they would get home had
picked them both up a little. hurin sat a bit straighter in his saddle, and loials ears did not seem so
wilted. it was no time or place to let them know he shared their fear, so he kept it to himself, and fought it
by himself.
hurin kept his humor through the morning, murmuring, as well we dont mean to stay, then chuckling,
until rand felt like telling him to be quiet. toward midday, the sniffer did fall silent, though, shaking his
head and frowning, and rand found he wished the man was still repeating his words and laughing.
is there something wrong with the trail, hurin? he asked.
the sniffer shrugged, looking troubled. yes, lord rand, and then again no, as you might say.
it must be one or the other. have you lost the trail? no shame if you have. you said it was weak to
start. if we cant find the darkfriends, we will find another stone and get back that way.light, anything
but that . rand kept his face smooth. if darkfriends can come here and leave, so can we.
oh, i havent lost it, lord rand. i can still pick out the stink of them. it isnt that. its just . . . its . . .
with a grimace, hurin burst out, its like im remembering it, lord rand, instead of smelling it. but im
not. theres dozens of trails crossing it all the time, dozens and dozens, and all sorts of smells of violence,
some of them fresh, almost, only washed out like everything else. this morning, right after we left the
hollow, i could have sworn there were hundreds slaughtered right under my feet, just minutes before, but
there werent any bodies, and not a mark on the grass but our own hoofprints. a thing like that couldnt
happen without the ground being torn up and bloodied, but there wasnt a mark. its all like that, my
lord. but i am following the trail. i am. this place just has me all on edge. thats it. that must be it.
rand glanced at loial  the ogier did come up with the oddest knowledge, at times  but he looked
as puzzled as hurin. rand made his voice more confident than he felt. i know you are doing your best,
hurin. we are all of us on edge. just follow as best you can, and well find them.
as you say, lord rand. hurin booted his horse forward. as you say.
but by nightfall, there was still no sign of the darkfriends, and hurin said the trail was fainter still. the
sniffer kept muttering to himself about remembering.
there had been no sign. really no sign. rand was not as good a tracker as uno, but any boy in the two
rivers was expected to track well enough to find a lost sheep, or a rabbit for dinner. he had seen
nothing. it was as if no living thing had ever disturbed the land before they came. there should have been
something if the darkfriends were ahead of them. but hurin kept following the trail he said he smelled.
as the sun touched the horizon they made camp in a stand of trees untouched by the burn, eating from
their saddlebags. flatbread and dried meat washed down with flattasting water; hardly a filling meal,
tough and far from tasty. rand thought they might have enough for a week. after that . . . hurin ate
slowly, determinedly, but loial gulped his down with a grimace and settled back with his pipe, the big
quarterstaff close at hand. rand kept their fire small and well hidden in the trees. fain and his darkfriends
and trollocs might be close enough to see a fire, for all of hurins worries about the oddness of their trail.
it seemed odd to him that he had begun to think of them as fains darkfriends, fains trollocs. fain
was just a madman.then why did they rescue him? fain had been part of the dark ones scheme to



find him. perhaps it had something to do with that.then why is he running instead of chasing me? and
what killed that fade? what happened in that room full of flies? and those eyes, watching me in
fal dara. and that wind, catching me like a beetle in pine sap. no. no, baalzamon has to he
dead . the aes sedai did not believe it. moiraine did not believe it, nor the amyrlin. stubbornly, he
refused to think about it any longer. all he had to think about now was finding that dagger for mat.
finding fain, and the horn.
its never over, althor.
the voice was like a thin breeze whispering in the back of his head, a thin, icy murmur working its way
into the crevices of his mind. he almost sought the void to escape it, but remembering what waited for
him there, he pushed down the desire.
in the half dark of twilight, he worked the forms with his sword, the way lan had taught, though without
the void. parting the silk. hummingbird kisses the honeyrose. heron wading in the rushes, for balance.
losing himself in the swift, sure movements, forgetting for a time where he was, he worked until sweat
covered him. yet when he was done, it all came back; nothing was changed. the weather was not cold,
but he shivered and pulled his cloak around him as he hunched by the fire. the others caught his mood,
and they finished eating quickly and in silence. no one complained when he kicked dirt over the last fitful
flames.
rand took the first watch himself, walking the edges of the copse with his bow, sometimes easing his
sword in its scabbard. the chill moon was almost full, standing high in the blackness, and the night was as
silent as the day had been, as empty. empty was the right word. the land was as empty as a dusty milk
crock. it was hard to believe there was anyone in the whole world, in this world, except for the three of
them, hard to believe even the darkfriends were there, somewhere ahead.
to keep himself company, he unwrapped thom merrilins cloak, exposing the harp and flute in their
hard leather cases atop the manycolored patches. he took the goldandsilver flute from its case,
remembering the gleeman teaching him as he fingered it, and played a few notes of the wind that
shakes the willow, softly so as not to wake the others. even soft, the sad sound was too loud in that
place, too real. with a sigh he replaced the flute and did up the bundle again.
he held the watch long into the night, letting the others sleep. he did not know how late it was when he
suddenly realized a fog had risen. close to the ground it lay, thick, making hurin and loial indistinct
mounds seeming to hump out of clouds. thinner higher up, it still shrouded the land around them, hiding
everything except the nearest trees. the moon seemed viewed through watered silk. anything at all could
come right up to them unseen. he touched his sword.
swords do no good against me, lews therin. you should know that.
the fog swirled around rands feet as he spun, the sword coming into his hands, heronmark blade
upright before him. the void leaped up inside him; for the first time, he barely noticed the tainted light of
saidin.
a shadowy figure drew nearer through the mist, walking with a tall staff. behind it, as if the shadows
shadow were vast, the fog darkened till it was blacker than night. rands skin crawled. closer the figure
came, until it resolved into the shape of a man, clothed and gloved in black, with a black silk mask
covering his face, and the shadow came with it. his staff was black, too, as if the wood had been
charred, yet smooth and shining like water by moonlight. for an instant the eyeholes of the mask glowed,
as if fires stood behind them rather than eyes, but rand did not need that to know who it was.



baalzamon,he breathed. this is a dream. it has to be. i fell asleep, and  
baalzamon laughed like the roar of an open furnace. you always try to deny what is, lews therin. if i
stretch out my hand, i can touch you, kinslayer. i can always touch you. always and everywhere.
i am not the dragon! my name is rand al  ! rand clamped his teeth shut to stop himself.
oh, i know the name you use now, lews therin. i know every name you have used through age after
age, long before you were even the kinslayer. baalzamons voice began to rise in intensity; sometimes
the fires of his eyes flared so high that rand could see them through the openings in the silk mask, see
them like endless seas of flame. i know you, know your blood and your line back to the first spark of
life that ever was, back to the first moment. you can never hide from me. never! we are tied together
as surely as two sides of the same coin. ordinary men may hide in the sweep of the pattern, buttaveren
stand out like beacon fires on a hill, and you,you stand out as if ten thousand shining arrows stood in the
sky to point you out! you are mine, and ever in reach of my hand!
father of lies! rand managed. despite the void, his tongue wanted to cleave to the roof of his mouth.
light, please let it be a dream . the thought skittered outside the emptiness.even one of those
dreams that isnt a dream. he cant really be standing in front of me. the dark one is sealed in
shayol ghul, sealed by the creator at the moment of creation . . . he knew too much of the truth
for it to help. youre well named! if you could just take me, why havent you? because you cannot. i
walk in the light, and you cannot touch me!
baalzamon leaned on his staff and looked at rand a moment, then moved to stand over loial and
hurin, peering down at them. the vast shadow moved with him. he did not disturb the fog, rand saw 
he moved, the staff swung with his steps, but the gray mist did not swirl and eddy around his feet as it did
around rands. that gave him heart. perhaps baalzamon really wasnot there. perhaps it was a dream.
you find odd followers, baalzamon mused. you always did. these two. the girl who tries to watch
over you. a poor guardian and weak, kinslayer. if she had a lifetime to grow, she would never grow
strong enough for you to hide behind.
girl? who? moiraine is surely not a girl. i dont know what you are talking about, father of lies.
you lie, and lie, and even when you tell the truth, you twist it to a lie.
do i, lews therin? you know what you are, who you are. i have told you. and so have those women
of tar valon. rand shifted, and baalzamon gave a laugh, like a small thunderclap. they think
themselves safe in their white tower, but my followers number even some of their own. the aes sedai
called moiraine told you who you are, did she not? did she lie? or is she one of mine? the white tower
means to use you like a hound on a leash. do i lie? do i lie when i say you seek the horn of valere?
he laughed again; calm of the void or no, it was all rand could do not to cover his ears. sometimes old
enemies fight so long that they become allies and never realize it. they think they strike at you, but they
have become so closely linked it is as if you guided the blow yourself.
you dont guide me, rand said. i deny you.
i have a thousand strings tied to you, kinslayer, each one finer than silk and stronger than steel. time
has tied a thousand cords between us. the battle we two have fought  do you remember any part of
that? do you have any glimmering that we have fought before, battles without number back to the
beginning of time? i know much that you do not! that battle will soon end. the last battle is coming.



the last, lews therin. do you really think you can avoid it? you poor, shivering worm. you will serve
me or die! and this time the cycle will not begin anew with your death. the grave belongs to the great
lord of the dark. this time if you die, you will be destroyed utterly. this time the wheel will be broken
whatever you do, and the world remade to a new mold. serve me! serve shaitan, or be destroyed
forever!
with the utterance of that name, the air seemed to thicken. the darkness behind baalzamon swelled
and grew, threatening to swallow everything. rand felt it engulfing him, colder than ice and hotter than
coals both at the same time, blacker than death, sucking him into the depths of it, overwhelming the
world.
he gripped his sword hilt till his knuckles hurt. i deny you, and i deny your power. i walk in the light.
the light preserves us, and we shelter in the palm of the creators hand. he blinked. baalzamon still
stood there, and the great darkness still hung behind him, but it was as if all the rest had been illusion.
do you want to see my face? it was a whisper.
rand swallowed. no.
you should. a gloved hand went to the black mask.
no!
the mask came away. it was a mans face, horribly burned. yet between the blackedged, red crevices
crossing those features, the skin looked healthy and smooth. dark eyes looked at rand; cruel lips smiled
with a flash of white teeth. look at me, kinslayer, and see the hundredth part of your own fate. for a
moment eyes and mouth became doorways into endless caverns of fire. this is what the power
unchecked can do, even to me. but i heal, lews therin. i know the paths to greater power. it will burn
you like a moth flying into a furnace.
i will not touch it! rand felt the void around him, feltsaidin . i wont.
you cannot stop yourself.
leave  me  alone!
power. baalzamons voice became soft, insinuating. you can have power again, lews therin. you
are linked to it now, this moment. i know it. i can see it. feel it, lews therin. feel the glow inside you.
feel the power that could be yours. all you must do is reach out for it. but the shadow is there between
you and it. madness and death. you need not die, lews therin, not ever again.
no, rand said, but the voice went on, burrowing into him.
i can teach you to control that power so that it does not destroy you. no one else lives who can teach
you that. the great lord of the dark can shelter you from the madness. the power can be yours, and
you can live forever. forever! all you must do in return is serve. only serve. simple words  i am
yours, great lord  and power will be yours. power beyond anything those women of tar valon
dream of, and life eternal, if you will only offer yourself up and serve.
rand licked his lips.not to go mad. not to die . never! i walk in the light, he grated hoarsely, and
you can never touch me!



touch you, lews therin? touch you? i can consume you! taste it and know, as i knew!
those dark eyes became fire again, and that mouth, flame that blossomed and grew until it seemed
brighter than a summer sun. grew, and suddenly rands sword glowed as if just drawn from the forge.
he cried out as the hilt burned his hands, screamed and dropped the sword. and the fog caught fire, fire
that leaped, fire that burned everything.
yelling, rand beat at his clothes as they smoked and charred and fell in ashes, beat with hands that
blackened and shriveled as naked flesh cracked and peeled away in the flames. he screamed. pain beat
at the void inside him, and he tried to crawl deeper into the emptiness. the glow was there, the tainted
light just out of sight. half mad, no longer caring what it was, he reached forsaidin , tried to wrap it
around him, tried to hide in it from the burning and the pain.
as suddenly as the fire began, it was gone. rand stared wonderingly at his hand sticking out of the red
sleeve of his coat. there was not so much as a singe on the wool.i imagined it all . frantically, he
looked around. baalzamon was gone. hurin shifted in his sleep; the sniffer and loial were still only two
mounds sticking up out of the low fog.i did imagine it.
before relief had a chance to grow, pain stabbed his right hand, and he turned it up to look. there
across the palm was branded a heron. the heron from the hilt of his sword, angry and red, as neatly
done as though drawn with an artists skill.
fumbling a kerchief from his coat pocket, he wrapped it around his hand. the hand throbbed, now. the
void would help with that  he wasaware of pain in the void, but he did notfeel it  but he put the
thought out of his head. twice now, unknowing  and once on purpose; he could not forget that  he
had tried to channel the one power while he was in the void. it was with that that baalzamon wanted to
tempt him. it was that that moiraine and the amyrlin seat wanted him to do. he would not.

chapter 16

in the mirror of darkness

you should not have done it, lord rand, hurin said when rand woke the others just at daybreak. the
sun yet hid below the horizon, but there was light enough to see. the fog had melted away while dark still
held, fading reluctantly. if you use yourself up to spare us, my lord, who will see to getting us home?
i needed to think, rand said. nothing showed the fog had ever been, or baalzamon. he fingered the
kerchief wrapped around his right hand. there was that to prove baalzamon had been there. he wanted



to be away from this place. time to be in the saddle if we are going to catch fains darkfriends. past
time. we can eat flatbread while we ride.
loial paused in the act of stretching, his arms reaching as high as hurin could have standing on rands
shoulders. your hand, rand. what happened?
i hurt it. its nothing.
i have a salve in my saddlebags  
it is nothing rand knew he sounded harsh, but one look at the brand would surely bring questions he
did not want to answer. times wasting. let us be on our way. he set about saddling red, awkwardly
because of his injured hand, and hurin jumped to his own horse.
no need to be so touchy, loial muttered.
a track, rand decided as they set out, would be something natural in that world. there were too many
unnatural things there. even a single hoofprint would be welcome. fain and the darkfriends and the
trollocs had to leave some mark. he concentrated on the ground they passed over, trying to make out
any trace that could have been made by another living thing.
there was nothing, not a turned stone, not a disturbed clod of earth. once he looked at the ground
behind them, just to reassure himself that the land did take hoofprints; scraped turf and bent grass
marked their passage plainly, yet ahead the ground was undisturbed. but hurin insisted he could smell the
trail, faint and thin, but still heading south.
once again the sniffer put all his attentions on the trail he followed, like a hound tracking deer, and once
again loial rode lost in his own thoughts, muttering to himself and rubbing the huge quarterstaff held
across his saddle in front of him.
they had not been riding more than an hour when rand saw the spire ahead. he was so busy watching
for tracks that the tapering column already stood thick and tall above the trees in the middle distance
when he first noticed it. i wonder what that is. it lay directly in their path.
i dont know what it can be, rand, loial said.
if this  if this was our own world, lord rand . . . hurin shifted uncomfortably in his saddle. well,
that monument lord ingtar was talking about  the one to artur hawkwings victory over the trollocs
 it was a great spire. but it was torn down a thousand years ago. theres nothing left but a big mound,
like a hill. i saw it, when i went to cairhien for lord agelmar.
according to ingtar, loial said, that is still three or four days ahead of us. if it is here at all. i dont
know why it should be. i dont think there are any people here at all.
the sniffer put his eyes back on the ground. thats just it, isnt it, builder? no people, but there it is
ahead of us. maybe we ought to keep clear of it, my lord rand. no telling what it is, or whos there, in
a place like this.
rand drummed his fingers on the high pommel of his saddle for a moment, thinking. we have to stick as
close to the trail as we can, he said finally. we dont seem to be getting any closer to fain as it is, and i
dont want to lose more time, if we can avoid it. if we see any people, or anything out of the ordinary,



then well circle around until we pick it up again. but until then, we keep on.
as you say, my lord. the sniffer sounded odd, and he gave rand a quick, sidelong look. as you
say.
rand frowned for a moment before he understood, and then it was his turn to sigh. lords did not explain
to those who followed them, only to other lords.i didnt ask him to take me for a bloody lord. but he
did , a small voice seemed to answer him,and you let him. you made the choice; now the duty is
yours.
take the trail, hurin, rand said.
with a flash of relieved grin, the sniffer heeled his horse onward.
the weak sun climbed as they rode, and by the time it was overhead, they were only a mile or so from
the spire. they had reached one of the streams, in a gully a pace deep, and the intervening trees were
sparse. rand could see the mound it was built on, like a round, flattopped hill. the gray spire itself rose
at least a hundred spans, and he could just make out now that the top was carved in the likeness of a bird
with outstretched wings.
a hawk, rand said. itis hawkwings monument. it must be. there were people here, whether there
are now or not. they just built it in another place here, and never tore it down. think of it, hurin. when
we get back, youll be able to tell them what the monument really looked like. there will only be three of
us in the whole world who have ever seen it.
hurin nodded. yes, my lord. my children would like to hear that tale, their father seeing hawkwings
spire.
rand, loial began worriedly.
we can gallop the distance, rand said. come on. a gallop will do us good. this place may be dead,
but were alive.
rand, loial said, i dont think that is a  
not waiting to hear, rand dug his boots into reds flanks, and the stallion sprang forward. he splashed
across the shallow ribbon of water in two strides, then scrabbled up the far side. hurin launched his horse
right behind him. rand heard loial calling behind them, but he laughed, waved for the ogier to follow,
and galloped on. if he kept his eyes on one spot, the land did not seem to slip and slide so badly, and the
wind felt good on his face.
the mound covered a good two hides, but the grassy slope rose at an easy slant. the gray spire reared
into the sky, squared and broad enough despite its height to seem massive, almost squat. rands laughter
died, and he pulled red up, his face grim.
is that hawkwings monument, lord rand? hurin asked uneasily. it doesnt look right, somehow.
rand recognized the harsh, angular script that covered the face of the monument, and he recognized
some of the symbols chiseled on the breadth, chiseled as tall as a man. the horned skull of the davol
trollocs. the iron fist of the dhaimon. the trident of the kabol, and the whirlwind of the ahffrait.
there was a hawk, too, carved near the bottom. with a wingspan of ten paces, it lay on its back, pierced



by a lightning bolt, and ravens pecked at its eyes. the huge wings atop the spire seemed to block the sun.
he heard loial galloping up behind him.
i tried to tell you, rand, loial said. it is a raven, not a hawk. i could see it clearly. hurin turned his
horse, refusing even to look at the spire any longer.
but how? rand said. artur hawkwing won a victory over the trollocs here. ingtar said so.
not here, loial said slowly. obviously not here. from stone to stone run the lines of if, between the
worlds that might be. ive been thinking on it, and i believe i know what the the worlds that might be
are. maybe i do. worlds our world might have been if things had happened differently. maybe thats
why it is all so . . . washedout looking. because its an if, a maybe. just a shadow of the real world.
in this world, i think, the trollocs won. maybe thats why we have not seen any villages or people.
rands skin crawled. where trollocs won, they did not leave humans alive except for food. if they had
won across an entire world . . . if the trollocs had won, they would be everywhere. wed have seen a
thousand of them by now. wed be dead since yesterday.
i do not know, rand. perhaps, after they killed the people, they killed one another. trollocs live to kill.
that is all they do; that is all they are. i just dont know.
lord rand, hurin said abruptly, something moved down there.
rand whirled his horse, ready to see charging trollocs, but hurin was pointing back the way they had
come, at nothing. what did you see, hurin? where?
the sniffer let his arm drop. right at the edge of that clump of trees there, about a mile. i thought it was
. . . a woman . . . and something else i couldnt make out, but . . . he shivered. its so hard to make
out things that arent under your nose. aaah, this place has my guts all awhirl. im likely imagining things,
my lord. this is a place for queer fancies. his shoulders hunched as if he felt the spire pressing on them.
no doubt it was just the wind, my lord.
loial said, theres something else to consider, im afraid. he sounded troubled again. he pointed
southward. what do you see off there?
rand squinted against the way things far off seemed to slide toward him. land like what weve been
crossing. trees. then some hills, and mountains. nothing else. what do you want me to see?
the mountains, loial sighed. the tufts on his ears drooped, and the ends of his eyebrows were down
on his cheeks. that has to be kinslayers dagger, rand. there arent any other mountains they could
be, unless this world is completely different from ours. but kinslayers dagger lies more than a hundred
leagues south of the erinin. a good bit more. distances are hard to judge in this place, but . . . i think we
will reach them before dark. he did not have to say any more. they could not have covered over a
hundred leagues in less than three days.
without thinking, rand muttered, maybe this place is like the ways. he heard hurin moan, and
instantly regretted not keeping a rein on his tongue.
it was not a pleasant thought. enter a waygate  they could be found just outside ogierstedding , and
in ogier groves  enter and walk for a day, and you could leave by another waygate a hundred leagues



from where you started. the ways were dark, now, and foul, and to travel them meant to risk death or
madness. even fades feared to travel the ways.
if it is, rand, loial said slowly, can a misstep kill us here, too? are there things we have not yet seen
that can do worse than kill us? hurin moaned again.
they had been drinking the water, riding along as if they had not a concern in the world. unconcern
would kill quickly in the ways. rand swallowed, hoping his stomach would settle.
it is too late for worrying about what is past, he said. from here on, though, we will watch our step.
he glanced at hurin. the sniffers head had sunk between his shoulders, and his eyes darted as if he
wondered what would leap at him, and from where. the man had run down murderers, but this was
more than he had ever bargained for. hold on to yourself, hurin. we are not dead, yet, and we wont
be. we will just have to be careful from here on. thats all.
it was at that moment they heard the scream, thin with distance.
a woman! hurin said. even this much that was normal seemed to rouse him a little. i knew i saw 

another scream came, more desperate than the first.
not unless she can fly, rand said. shes south of us. he kicked red to a dead run in two strides.
be careful you said! loial shouted after him. light, rand, remember! be careful!
rand lay low on reds back, letting the stallion run. the screams drew him on. it was easy to say be
careful, but there was terror in that womans voice. she did not sound as if she had time for him to be
careful. on the edge of another stream, in a sheerbanked channel deeper than most, he drew rein; red
skidded in a shower of stones and dirt. the screams were coming . . .there!
he took it all in at a glance. perhaps two hundred paces away, the woman stood beside her horse in the
stream, both of them backed against the far bank. with a broken length of branch, she was fending off a
snarling . . . something. rand swallowed, stunned for a moment. if a frog were as big as a bear, or if a
bear had a frogs graygreen hide, it might look like that. a big bear.
not letting himself think about the creature, he leaped to the ground, unlimbering his bow. if he took the
time to ride closer, it might be too late. the woman was barely keeping the . . . thing . . . at the edge of
the branch. it was a fair distance  he kept blinking as he tried to judge it; the distance seemed to
change by spans every time the thing moved  yet a big target. his bandaged hand made drawing
awkward, but he had an arrow loosed almost before his feet were set.
the shaft sank into the leathery hide for half its length, and the creature spun to face rand. rand took a
step back despite the distance. that huge, wedgeshaped head had never been on any animal he could
imagine, nor that wide, hornylipped beak of a mouth, hooked for ripping flesh. and it had three eyes,
small, and fierce, and ringed by hardlooking ridges. gathering itself, the thing bounded toward him down
the stream in great, splashing leaps. to rands eye, some of the leaps seemed to cover twice as much
distance as others, though he was sure they were all the same.
an eye, the woman called. she sounded surprisingly calm, considering her screams. you must hit an
eye to kill it.



he drew the fletching of another arrow back to his ear. reluctantly, he sought the void; he did not want
to, but it was for this that tam had taught him, and he knew he could never make the shot without it.my
father , he thought with a sense of loss, and emptiness filled him. the quavering light ofsaidin was there,
but he shut it away. he was one with the bow, with the arrow, with the monstrous shape leaping toward
him. one with the tiny eye. he did not even feel the arrow leave the bowstring.
the creature rose in another bound, and at the peak, the arrow struck its central eye. the thing landed,
fountaining another huge splash of water and mud. ripples spread out from it, but it did not move.
well shot, and bravely, the woman called. she was on her horse, riding to meet him. rand felt vaguely
surprised that she had not run once the things attention was diverted. she rode past the bulk, still
surrounded by the ripples of its dying, without even a downward glance, scrambled her horse up the
bank and dismounted. few men would stand to face the charge of agrolm , my lord.
she was all in white, her dress divided for riding and belted in silver, and her boots, peeking out from
under her hems, were tooled in silver, too. even her saddle was white, and silvermounted. her snowy
mare, with its arched neck and dainty step, was almost as tall as rands bay. but it was the woman
herself  she was perhaps nynaeves age, he thought  who held his eyes. she was tall, for one thing;
a hand taller and she could almost look him in the eyes. for another, she was beautiful, ivorypale skin
contrasting sharply with long, nightdark hair and black eyes. he had seen beautiful women. moiraine
was beautiful, if cool, and so was nynaeve, when her temper did not get the better of her. egwene, and
elayne, the daughterheir of andor, were each enough to take a mans breath. but this woman . . . his
tongue stuck to the roof of his mouth; he felt his heart start beating again.
your retainers, my lord?
startled, he looked around. hurin and loial had joined them. hurin was staring the way rand knew he
had been, and even the ogier seemed fascinated. my friends, he said. loial, and hurin. my name is
rand. rand althor.
i have never thought of it before, loial said abruptly, sounding as if he were talking to himself, but if
there is such a thing as perfect human beauty, in face and form, then you  
loial! rand shouted. the ogiers ears stiffened in embarrassment. rands own ears were red; loials
words had been too close to what he himself was thinking.
the woman laughed musically, but the next instant she was all regal formality, like a queen on her throne.
i am called selene, she said. you have risked your life, and saved mine. i am yours, lord rand
althor. and, to rands horror, she knelt before him.
not looking at hurin or loial, he hastily pulled her to her feet. a man who will not die to save a woman
is no man. immediately he disgraced himself by blushing. it was a shienaran saying, and he knew it
sounded pompous before it was out of his mouth, but her manner had infected him, and he could not stop
it. i mean . . . that is, it was . . .fool, you cant tell a woman saving her life was nothing . it was
my honor. that sounded vaguely shienaran and formal. he hoped it would do; his mind was as blank of
anything else to say as if he were still in the void.
suddenly he became conscious of her eyes on him. her expression had not changed, but her dark eyes
made him feel as if he were naked. unbidden, the thought came of selene with no clothes. his face went
red again. aaah! ah, where are you from, selene? we have not seen another human being since we



came here. is your town nearby? she looked at him thoughtfully, and he stepped back. her look made
him too aware of how close to her he was.
im not from this world, my lord, she said. there are no people here. nothing living except thegrolm
and a few other creatures like them. i am from cairhien. and as to how i came here, i dont know,
exactly. i was out riding, and i stopped to nap, and when i woke, my horse and i were here. i can only
hope, my lord, that you can save me again, and help me go home.
selene, i am not a . . . that is, please call me rand. his ears felt hot again.light, it wont hurt
anything if she thinks im a lord. burn me, it wont hurt anything.
if you wish it . . . rand. her smile made his throat tighten. you will help me?
of course, i will.burn me, but shes beautiful. and looking at me like im a hero in a story . he
shook his head to clear it of foolishness. but first we have to find the men we are following. ill try to
keep you out of danger, but we must find them. coming with us will be better than staying here alone.
for a moment she was silent, her face blank and smooth; rand had no idea what she was thinking,
except that she seemed to be studying him anew. a man of duty, she said finally. a small smile touched
her lips. i like that. yes. who are these miscreants you follow?
darkfriends and trollocs, my lady, hurin burst out. he made an awkward bow to her from his
saddle. they did murder in fal dara keep and stole the horn of valere, my lady, but lord rand will
fetch it back.
rand stared at the sniffer ruefully; hurin gave a weak grin.so much for secrecy . it did not matter here,
he supposed, but once back in their world . . . selene, you must not say anything of the horn to anyone.
if it gets out, well have a hundred people on our heels trying to get the horn for themselves.
no, it would never do, selene said, forthat to fall into the wrong hands. the horn of valere. i could
not tell you how often ive dreamed of touching it, holding it in my hands. you must promise me, when
you have it, you will let me touch it.
before i can do that, we have to find it. we had better be on our way. rand offered his hand to help
her mount; hurin scrambled down to hold her stirrup. whatever that thing was i killed  agrolm ? 
there may be more of them around. her hand was firm  there was surprising strength in her grip 
and her skin was . . . silk? something softer, smoother. rand shivered.
there always are, selene said. the tall white mare frisked and bared her teeth once at red, yet
selenes touch on the reins quieted her.
rand slung his bow across his back and climbed onto red.light, how could anyones skin be so soft?
hurin, wheres the trail? hurin? hurin!
the sniffer gave a start, and left off staring at selene. yes, lord rand. ah . . . the trail. south, my lord.
still south.
then lets ride. rand gave an uneasy look at the graygreen bulk of thegrolm lying in the stream. it
had been better believing they were the only living things in that world. take the trail, hurin.
selene rode alongside rand at first, talking of this and that, asking him questions and calling him lord.



half a dozen times he started to tell her he was no lord, only a shepherd, and every time, looking at her,
he could not get the words out. a lady like her would not talk the same way with a shepherd, he was
sure, even one who had saved her life.
you will be a great man when youve found the horn of valere, she told him. a man for the legends.
the man who sounds the horn will make his own legends.
i dont want to sound it, and i dont want to be part of any legend. he did not know if she was
wearing perfume, but there seemed to be a scent to her, something that filled his head with her. spices,
sharp and sweet, tickling his nose, making him swallow.
every man wants to be great. you could be the greatest man in all the ages.
it sounded too close to what moiraine had said. the dragon reborn would certainly stand out through
the ages. not me, he said fervently. im just  he thought of her scorn if he told her now that he
was only a shepherd after letting her believe he was a lord, and changed what he had been going to say
 just trying to find it. and to help a friend.
she was silent a moment, then said, youve hurt your hand.
it is nothing. he started to put his injured hand inside his coat  it throbbed from holding the reins 
but she reached out and took it.
he was so surprised he let her, and then there was nothing to do except either jerk away rudely or else
let her unwrap the kerchief. her touch felt cool and sure. his palm was angrily red and puffy, but the
heron still stood out, plainly and clearly.
she touched the brand with a finger, but made no comment on it, not even to ask how he had come by
it. this could stiffen your hand if its untended. i have an ointment that should help. from a pocket
inside her cloak she produced a small stone vial, unstopped it, and began gently rubbing a white salve on
the burn as they rode.
the ointment felt cold at first, then seemed to melt away warmly into his flesh. and it worked as well as
nynaeves ointments sometimes did. he stared in amazement as the redness faded and the swelling went
down under her stroking fingers.
some men, she said, not raising her eyes from his hand, choose to seek greatness, while others are
forced to it. it is always better to choose than to be forced. a man whos forced is never completely his
own master. he must dance on the strings of those who forced him.
rand pulled his hand free. the brand looked a week old or more, all but healed. what do you mean?
he demanded.
she smiled at him, and he felt ashamed of his outburst. why, the horn, of course, she said calmly,
putting away her salve. her mare, stepping along beside red, was tall enough that her eyes were only a
little below rands. if you find the horn of valere, there will be no avoiding greatness. but will it be
forced on you, or will you take it? thats the question.
he flexed his hand. she sounded so much like moiraine. are you aes sedai?
selenes eyebrows lifted; her dark eyes glittered at him, but her voice was soft. aes sedai? i? no.



i didnt mean to offend you. im sorry.
offend me? i am not offended, but im no aes sedai. her lip curled in a sneer; even that was
beautiful. they cower in what they think is safety when they could do so much. they serve when they
could rule, let men fight wars when they could bring order to the world. no, never call me aes sedai. 
she smiled and laid her hand on his arm to show she was not angry  her touch made him swallow 
but he was relieved when she let the mare drop back beside loial. hurin bobbed his head at her like an
old family retainer.
rand was relieved, but he missed her presence, too. she was only two spans away  he twisted in his
saddle to stare at her, riding by loials side; the ogier was bent half double in his saddle so he could talk
with her  but that was not the same as being right there beside him, close enough for him to smell her
heady scent, close enough to touch. he settled back angrily. it was not that he wanted to touch her,
exactly  he reminded himself that he loved egwene; he felt guilty at the need for reminding  but she
was beautiful, and she thought he was a lord, and she said he could be a great man. he argued sourly
with himself inside his head.moiraine says you can be great, too; the dragon reborn. selene is not
aes sedai. thats right; shes a cairhienin noblewoman. and youre a shepherd. she doesnt know
that. how long do you let her believe a lie? its only till we get out of this place. if we get out. if.
on that note, his thoughts subsided to sullen silence.
he tried to keep a watch on the country through which they rode  if selene said there were more of
those things . . . thosegrolm . . . about, he believed her, and hurin was too intent on smelling the trail to
notice anything else. loial was too wrapped up in his talk with selene to see anything until it bit him on
the heel  but it was hard to watch. turning his head too quickly made his eyes water; a hill or a stand
of trees could seem a mile off when seen from one angle and only a few hundred spans when seen from
another.
the mountains were growing closer, of that much he was sure. kinslayers dagger, looming against the
sky now, a sawtooth expanse of snowcapped peaks. the land around them already rose in foothills
heralding the coming of the mountains. they would reach the edge of the mountains proper well before
dark, perhaps in only another hour or so.more than a hundred leagues in less than three days. worse
than that. we spent most of a day south of the erinin in the real world. over a hundred leagues in
less than two days, here.
she says you were right about this place, rand.
rand gave a start before he realized loial had ridden up beside him. he looked for selene and found
her riding with hurin; the sniffer was grinning and ducking his head and all but knuckling his forehead at
everything she said. rand glanced sideways at the ogier. im surprised you could let her go, the way
you two had your heads together. what do you mean, i was right?
she is a fascinating woman, isnt she? some of the elders dont know as much as she does about
history  especially the age of legends  and about  oh, yes. she says you were right about the
ways, rand. the aes sedai, some of them, studied worlds like this, and that study was the basis of how
they grew the ways. she says there are worlds where it is time rather than distance that changes. spend
a day in one of those, and you might come back to find a year has passed in the real world, or twenty.
or it could be the other way round. those worlds  this one, all the others  are reflections of the real
world, she says. this one seems pale to us because it is a weak reflection, a world that had little chance
of ever being. others are almost as likely as ours. those are as solid as our world, and have people. the
same people, she says, rand. imagine it! you could go to one of them and meet yourself. the pattern



has infinite variation, she says, and every variation that can be, will be.
rand shook his head, then wished he had not as the landscape flickered back and forth and his stomach
lurched. he took a deep breath. how does she know all that? you know about more things than
anybody i ever met before, loial, and all you knew about this world amounted to no more than a
rumor.
shes cairhienin, rand. the royal library in cairhien is one of the greatest in the world, perhaps the
greatest outside tar valon. the aiel spared it deliberately, you know, when they burned cairhien. they
will not destroy a book. did you know that they  
i dont care about aielmen, rand said hotly. if selene knows so much, i hope she read how to get us
home from here. i wish selene  
you wish selene what? the woman laughed as she joined them.
rand stared at her as if she had been gone months; that was how he felt. i wish selene would come
ride with me some more, he said. loial chuckled, and rand felt his face burn.
selene smiled, and looked at loial. you will excuse us,alantin .
the ogier bowed in his saddle and let his big horse fall back, the tufts on his ears drooping with
reluctance.
for a time rand rode in silence, enjoying selenes presence. now and again he looked at her out of the
corner of his eye. he wished he could get his feelings about her straight. could she be an aes sedai,
despite her denial? someone sent by moiraine to push him along whatever path he was meant to follow
in the aes sedais plans? moiraine could not have known he would be taken to this strange world, and
no aes sedai would have tried to fend off that beast with a stick when she could strike it dead or send it
running with the power. well. since she took him for a lord and no one in cairhien knew different, he
might keep on letting her think it. she was surely the most beautiful woman he had ever seen, intelligent
and learned, and she thought he was brave; what more could a man ask from a wife?thats crazy, too.
id marry egwene if i could marry anyone, but i cant ask a woman to marry a man whos going
to go mad, maybe hurt her . but selene was so beautiful.
she was studying his sword, he saw. he readied the words in his head. no, he was not a blademaster,
but his father had given him the sword.tam. light, why couldnt you really be my father? he
squashed the thought ruthlessly.
that was a magnificent shot, selene said.
no, im not a   rand began, then blinked. a shot?
yes. a tiny target, that eye, moving, at a hundred paces. youve a wonderful hand with that bow.
rand shifted awkwardly. ah . . . thank you. its a trick my father taught me. he told her about the
void, about how tam had taught him how to use it with the bow. he even found himself telling her about
lan and his sword lessons.
the oneness, she said, sounding satisfied. she saw his questioning look and added, that is what it is
called . . . in some places. the oneness. to learn the full use of it, it is best to wrap it around you



continuously, to dwell in it at all times, or so ive heard.
he did not even have to think about what lay waiting for him in the void to know his answer to that, but
what he said was, ill think about it.
wear this void of yours all the time, rand althor, and youll learn uses for it you never suspected.
i said i will think about it. she opened her mouth again, but he cut her off. you know all these things.
about the void  the oneness, you call it. about this world. loial reads books all the time; hes read
more books than ive ever seen, and hes never seen anything but a fragment about the stones.
selene drew herself up straight in her saddle. suddenly she reminded him of moiraine, and of queen
morgase, when they were angry.
there was a book written about these worlds, she said tightly. mirrors of the wheel. you see, the
alantin has not seen all the books that are.
what is thisalantin you call him? ive never heard  
the portal stone beside which i woke is up there, selene said, pointing into the mountains, off to the
east of their path. rand found himself wishing for her warmth again, and her smiles. if you take me to it,
you can return me to my home, as you promised. we can reach it in an hour.
rand barely looked where she pointed. using the stone  portal stone, she called it  meant wielding
the power, if he were to take her back to the real world. hurin, how is the trail?
fainter than ever, lord rand, but still there. the sniffer spared a quick grin and bob of his head for
selene. i think its starting to angle off to the west. theres some easier passes there, toward the tip of
the dagger, as i recall from when i went to cairhien that time.
rand sighed.fain, or one of his darkfriends, has to know another way to use the stones. a
darkfriend couldnt use the power . i have to follow the horn, selene.
how do you know your precious horn is even in this world? come with me, rand. youll find your
legend, i promise you. come with me.
you can use the stone, this portal stone, yourself, he said angrily. before the words were out of his
mouth he wanted them back.why does she have to keep talking about legends? stubbornly, he forced
himself to go on. the portal stone didnt bring you here by itself. you did it, selene. if you made the
stone bring you here, you can make it take you back. ill take you to it, but then i must go on after the
horn.
i know nothing about using the portal stones, rand. if i did anything, i dont know what it was.
rand studied her. she sat her saddle, straightbacked and tall, just as regally as before, but somehow
softer, too. proud, yet vulnerable, and needing him. he had put nynaeves age to her  a handful of
years older than himself  but he had been wrong, he realized. she was more his own age, and
beautiful, and she needed him. the thought, just the thought, of the void flickered through his head, and of
the light.saidin . to use the portal stone, he must dip himself back into that taint.
stay with me, selene, he said. well find the horn, and mats dagger, and well find a way back. i



promise you. just stay with me.
you always . . . selene drew a deep breath as if to calm herself. you always are so stubborn. well, i
can admire stubbornness in a man. there is little to a man whos too easily biddable.
rand colored; it was too much like the things egwene sometimes said, and they had all but been
promised in marriage since they were children. from selene, the words, and the direct look that went
with them, were a shock. he turned to tell hurin to press on with the trail.
from behind them came a distant, coughing grunt. before rand could whirl red to look, another bark
sounded, and three more on its heels. at first he could make out nothing as the landscape seemed to
waver in his eyes, but then he saw them through the widespread stands of trees, just topping a hill. five
shapes, it seemed, only half a mile distant, a bare thousand paces at most, and coming in thirtyfoot
bounds.
grolm, selene said calmly. a small pack, but they have our scent, it seems.

chapter 17

choices

well run for it, rand said. hurin, can you gallop and still follow the trail?
yes, lord rand.
then push on. we will  
it wont do any good, selene said. her white mare was the only one of their mounts not dancing at the
gruff barks coming from thegrolm . they dont give up, not ever. once they have your scent,grolm
keep coming, day and night, until they run you down. you must kill them all, or find a way to go
elsewhere. rand, the portal stone can take us elsewhere.
no! wecan kill them. i can. i already killed one. there are only five. if i can just find . . . he cast
around for the spot he needed, and found it. follow me! digging his heels in, he set red to a gallop,
confident before he heard their hooves that the others would come.
the place he had chosen was a low, round hill, bare of trees. nothing could come close without him
seeing. he swung down from his saddle and unlimbered his longbow. loial and hurin joined him on the
ground, the ogier hefting his huge quarterstaff, the sniffer with his short sword in his fist. neither



quarterstaff nor sword would be of much use if thegrolm closed with them.i wont let them get close.
this risk is not necessary, selene said. she barely looked toward thegrolm , bending from her saddle
to concentrate on rand. we can easily reach the portal stone ahead of them.
i will stop them. hastily rand counted the arrows remaining in his quiver. eighteen, each as long as his
arm, ten of them with points like chisels, designed to drive through trolloc armor. they would do as well
forgrolm as for trollocs. he stuck four of those upright in the ground in front of him; a fifth he nocked to
the bow. loial, hurin, you can do no good down here. mount and be ready to take selene to the stone
if any get through. he wondered whether he could kill one of the things with his sword, if it came to that.
you aremad! even the power is not as bad as this.
loial said something, but he did not hear; he was already seeking the void, as much to escape his own
thoughts as for need.you know whats waiting. but this way i dont have to touch it . the glow was
there, the light just out of sight. it seemed to flow toward him, but the emptiness was all. thoughts darted
across the surface of the void, visible in that tainted light.saidin. the power. madness. death .
extraneous thoughts. he was one with the bow, with the arrow, with the things topping the next rise.
thegrolm came on, overreaching one another in their leaps, five great, leathery shapes, tripleeyed, with
horny maws gaping. their grunting calls rebounded from the void, barely heard.
rand was not aware of raising his bow, or drawing the fletching against his cheek, to his ear. he was
one with the beasts, one with the center eye of the first. then the arrow was gone. the firstgrolm died;
one of its companions leaped on it as it fell, beak of a mouth ripping gobbets of flesh. it snarled at the
others, and they circled wide. but they came on, and as if compelled, it abandoned its meal and leaped
after them, its horny maw already bloody.
rand worked smoothly, unconsciously, nock and release. nock and release.
the fifth arrow left his bow, and he lowered it, still deep in the void, as the fourthgrolm fell like a huge
puppet with its strings cut. though the final arrow still flew, somehow he knew there was no need for
another shot. the last beast collapsed as if its bones had melted, a feathered shaft jutting from its center
eye. always the center eye.
magnificent, lord rand, hurin said. i . . . ive never seen shooting like that.
the void held rand. the light called to him, and he . . . reached . . . toward it. it surrounded him, filled
him.
lord rand? hurin touched his arm, and rand gave a start, the emptiness filling up with what was
around him. are you all right, my lord?
rand brushed his forehead with fingertips. it was dry; he felt as if it should have been covered with
sweat. i . . . im fine, hurin.
it grows easier each time you do it, ive heard, selene said. the more you live in the oneness, the
easier.
rand glanced at her. well, i wont need it again, not for a while.what happened? i wanted to . . .
he still wanted to, he realized with horror. hewanted to go back into the void, wanted to feel that light
filling him again. it had seemed as if he were truly alive then, sickliness and all, and now was only an



imitation. no, worse. he had been almost alive, knowing what alive would be like. all he had to do
was reach out tosaidin . . .
not again, he muttered. he gazed off at the deadgrolm , five monstrous shapes lying on the ground.
not dangerous anymore. now we can be on our  
a coughing bark, all too familiar, sounded beyond the deadgrolm , beyond the next hill, and others
answered it. still more came, from the east, from the west.
rand half raised his bow.
how many arrows do you have left? selene demanded. can you kill twentygrolm ? thirty? a
hundred? we must go to the portal stone.
she is right, rand, loial said slowly. you do not have any choice now. hurin was watching rand
anxiously. thegrolm called, a score of barks overlapping.
the stone, rand agreed reluctantly. angrily he threw himself back into his saddle, slung the bow on
his back. lead us to this stone, selene.
with a nod she turned her mare and heeled it to a trot. rand and the others followed, they eagerly, he
holding back. the barks ofgrolm pursued them, hundreds it seemed. it sounded as if thegrolm were
ranged in a semicircle around them, closing in from every direction but the front.
swiftly and surely selene led them through the hills. the land rose in the beginning of mountains, slopes
steepening so the horses scrambled over washedout looking rocky outcrops and the sparse,
fadedlooking brush that clung to them. the way became harder, the land slanting more and more
upward.
were not going to make it, rand thought, the fifth time red slipped and slid backwards in a shower of
stone. loial threw his quarterstaff aside; it would be of no use againstgrolm , and it only slowed him. the
ogier had given up riding; he used one hand to haul himself up, and pulled his tall horse behind him with
the other. the hairyfetlocked animal made heavy going, but easier than with loial on its back.grolm
barked behind them, closer now.
then selene drew rein and pointed to a hollow nestled below them in the granite. it was all there, the
seven wide, colored stairs around a pale floor, and the tall stone column in the middle.
she dismounted and led her mare into the hollow, down the stairs to the column. it loomed over her.
she turned to look back up at rand and the others. thegrolm gave their grunting barks, scores of them,
loud. near. they will be on us soon, she said. you must use the stone, rand. or else find a way to
kill all thegrolm .
with a sigh, rand got down from his saddle and led red into the hollow. loial and hurin followed
hastily. he stared at the symbolcovered column, the portal stone, uneasily.she must be able to
channel, even if she doesnt know it, or it couldnt have brought her here. the power doesnt
harm women . if this brought you here, he began, but she interrupted him.
i know what it is, she said firmly, but i do not know how to use it. you must do what must be done.
she traced one symbol, a little larger than the others, with a finger. a triangle standing on its point inside a
circle. this stands for the true world, our world. i believe it will help if you hold it in your mind while you



. . .  she spread her hands as if unsure exactly what it was he was supposed to do.
uh . . . my lord? hurin said diffidently. there isnt much time. he glanced over his shoulder at the
rim of the hollow. the barking was louder. those things will be here in minutes, now. loial nodded.
drawing a deep breath, rand put his hand on the symbol selene had pointed out. he looked at her to
see if he was doing it right, but she merely watched, not even the slightest frown of worry wrinkling her
pale forehead.shes confident you can save her. you have to . the scent of her filled his nostrils.
uh . . . my lord?
rand swallowed, and sought the void. it came easily, springing up around him without effort. emptiness.
emptiness except for the light, wavering in a way that turned his stomach. emptiness except forsaidin .
but even the queasiness was distant. he was one with the portal stone. the column felt smooth and
slightly oily under his hand, but the triangleandcircle seemed warm against the brand on his palm.have
to get them to safety. have to get them home . the light drifted toward him, it seemed, surrounded
him, and he . . . embraced . . . it.
light filled him. heat filled him. he could see the stone, see the others watching him  loial and hurin
anxiously, selene showing no doubt that he could save her  but they might as well not have been there.
the light was all. the heat and the light, suffusing his limbs like water sinking into dry sand, filling him. the
symbol burned against his flesh. he tried to suck it all in, all the heat, all the light. all. the symbol . . .
suddenly, as if the sun had gone out for the blink of an eye, the world flickered. and again. the symbol
was a live coal under his hand; he drank in the light. the world flickered. flickered. it made him sick,
that light; it was water to a man dying of thirst. flicker. he sucked at it. it made him want to vomit; he
wanted it all. flicker. the triangleandcircle seared him; he could feel it charring his hand. flicker. he
wanted it all! he screamed, howling with pain, howling with wanting.
flicker . . . flicker . . . flickerflickerflicker . . .
hands pulled at him; he was only vaguely aware of them. he staggered back; the void was slipping
away, the light, and the sickness that twisted at him. the light. he watched it go regretfully.light, thats
crazy to want it. but i was so fullof it! i was so . . . dazed, he stared at selene. it was she who held his
shoulders, stared wonderingly into his eyes. he raised his hand in front of his face. the heron brand was
there, but nothing else. no triangleandcircle burned into his flesh.
remarkable, selene said slowly. she glanced at loial and hurin. the ogier looked stunned, his eyes
as big as plates; the sniffer was squatting with one hand on the ground, as if unsure he could support
himself else. all of us here, and all of our horses. and you do not even know what you did.
remarkable.
are we . . .? rand began hoarsely, and had to stop to swallow.
look around you, selene said. youve brought us home. she gave a sudden laugh. you brought all
of us home.
for the first time rand became aware of his surroundings again. the hollow surrounded them without
any stairs, through here and there lay a suspiciously smooth piece of stone, colored red, or blue. the
column lay against the mountainside, half buried in the loose rock of a fall. the symbols were unclear,
here; wind and water had worked long on them. and everything looked real. the colors were solid, the



granite a strong gray, the brush green and brown. after that other place, it seemed almost too vivid.
home, rand breathed, and then he was laughing, too. were home. loials laughter sounded like a
bull bellowing. hurin danced a caper.
you did it, selene said, leaning closer, until her face filled rands eyes. i knew that you could.
rands laughter died. i  i suppose i did. he glanced at the fallen portal stone and managed a weak
laugh. i wish i knew what it was i did, though.
selene looked deep into his eyes. perhaps one day you will know, she said softly. you are surely
destined for great things.
her eyes seemed as dark and deep as night, as soft as velvet. her mouth . . .if i kissed her . . . he
blinked and stepped back hurriedly, clearing his throat. selene, please dont tell anyone about this.
about the portal stone, and me. i dont understand it, and neither will anybody else. you know how
people are about things they dont understand.
her face wore no expression at all. suddenly he wished very much that mat and perrin were there.
perrin knew how to talk to girls, and mat could lie with a straight face. he could manage neither very
well.
suddenly selene smiled, and dropped a halfmocking curtsy. i will keep your secret, my lord rand
althor.
rand glanced at her, and cleared his throat again.is she angry with me? shed certainly be angry if i
had tried to kiss her. i think . he wished she would not look at him as she was, as if she knew what he
was thinking. hurin, is there any chance the darkfriends used this stone before us?
the sniffer shook his head ruefully. they were angling to the west of here, lord rand. unless these
portal stone things are more common than ive seen, id say theyre still in that other world. but it
wouldnt take me an hour to check it. the lands the same here as there. i could find the place here
where i lost the trail there, if you see what i mean, and see if theyve already gone by.
rand glanced at the sky. the sun  a wonderfully strong sun, not pale at all  sat low to the west,
stretching their shadows out across the hollow. another hour would bring full twilight. in the morning,
he said. but i fear weve lost them.we cant lose that dagger! we cant! selene, if thats the case, in
the morning we will take you on to your home. is it in the city of cairhien itself, or . . .?
you may not have lost the horn of valere yet, selene said slowly. as you know, i do know afew
things about those worlds.
mirrors of the wheel, loial said.
she gave him a look, then nodded. yes. exactly. those worlds truly are mirrors in a way, especially the
ones where there are no people. some of them reflect only great events in the true world, but some have
a shadow of that reflection even before the event occurs. the passage of the horn of valere would
certainly be a great event. reflections of what will be are fainter than reflections of what is or what was,
just as hurin says the trail he followed was faint.
hurin blinked incredulously. you mean to say, my lady, ive been smelling where those darkfriends



aregoing to be? the light help me, i wouldnt like that. its bad enough smelling where violencehas
been, with out smelling where itwill be, too. there cant be many spots where there wont besome kind
of violence,some time. it would drive me crazy, like as not. that place we just left nearly did. i could
smell it all the time, there, killing and hurting, and the vilest evil you could think of. i could even smell it on
us. on all of us. even on you, my lady, if youll forgive me for saying so. it was just that place, twisting
me the way it twisted your eye. he gave himself a shake. im glad were out of there. i cant get it out
of my nostrils yet, all the way.
rand rubbed absently at the brand on his palm. what do you think, loial? could we really be ahead of
fains darkfriends?
the ogier shrugged, frowning. i dont know, rand. i dont know anything about any of this. i think we
are back in our world. i think we are in kinslayers dagger. beyond that . . . he shrugged again.
we should be seeing you home, selene, rand said. your people will be worried about you.
a few days will see if im right, she said impatiently. hurin can find where he left the trail; he said so.
we can watch over it. the horn of valere cannot be much longer reaching here. the horn of valere,
rand. think of it. the man who sounds the horn will live in legend forever.
i dont want anything to do with legends, he said sharply.but if the darkfriends get by you . . . what
if ingtar lost them? then the darkfriends have the horn of valere forever, and mat dies . all
right, a few days. at the worst, we will probably meet ingtar and the others. i cant imagine theyve
stopped or turned back just because we . . . went away.
a wise decision, rand, selene said, and well thought out. she touched his arm and smiled, and he
found himself again thinking of kissing her.
uh . . . we need to be closer to where theyll come. if they do come. hurin, can you find us a camp
before dark, somewhere we can watch the place where you lost the trail? he glanced at the portal
stone and thought about sleeping near it, thought of the way the void had crept up on him in sleep the last
time, and the light in the void. somewhere well away from here.
leave it in my hands, lord rand. the sniffer scrambled to his saddle. i vow, ill never sleep again
without first i see what kind of stone there is nearby.
as rand rode red up out of the hollow, he found himself watching selene more than he did hurin. she
seemed so cool and selfpossessed, no older than he, yet queenly, but when she smiled at him, as she did
just then . . .egwene wouldnt have said i was wise. egwene would have called me a woolhead .
irritably, he heeled reds flanks.

chapter 18



to the white tower

egwene balanced on the heeling deck as theriver queen sped down the wide erinin under clouddark
skies, sails fullbellied, white flame banner whipping furiously at the mainmast. the wind had risen as
soon as the last of them was aboard the ships, back in medo, and it had not failed or flagged for an
instant since, day or night. the river had begun to race in flood, as it still did, slapping the ships about
while it drove them onward. wind and river had not slowed, and neither had the ships, all clustered
together. theriver queen led, only right for the vessel that carried the amyrlin seat.
the helmsman held his tiller grimly, feet planted and spread, and sailors padded barefoot at their work,
intent on what they did; when they glanced at the sky or the river, they tore their eyes away with low
mutters. a village was just fading from view behind, and a boy raced along the bank; he had kept up with
the ships for a short distance, but now they were leaving him behind. when he vanished, egwene made
her way below.
in the small cabin they shared, nynaeve glared up at her from her narrow bed. they say well reach
tar valon today. the light help me, but ill be glad to put foot on land again even if it is in tar valon.
the ship lurched with wind and current, and nynaeve swallowed. ill never step on a boat again, she
said breathlessly.
egwene shook the river spray out of her cloak and hung it on a peg by the door. it was not a big cabin
 there were no big cabins on the ship, it seemed, not even the one the amyrlin had taken over from the
captain, though that was larger than the rest. with its two beds built into the walls, shelves beneath them
and cabinets above, everything lay close to hand.
except for keeping her balance, the movements of the ship did not bother her the way they did
nynaeve; she had given up offering nynaeve food after the third time the wisdom threw the bowl at her.
im worried about rand, she said.
im worried about all of them, nynaeve replied dully. after a moment, she said, another dream last
night? the way youve been staring at nothing since you got up . . .
egwene nodded. she had never been very good at keeping things from nynaeve, and she had not tried
with the dreams. nynaeve had tried to dose her at first, until she heard one of the aes sedai was
interested; then she began to believe. it was like the others. different, but the same. rand is in some
kind of danger. i know it. and it is getting worse. hes done something, or hes going to do something,
that puts him in . . . she dropped down on her bed and leaned toward the other woman. i just wish i
could make some sense of it.
channeling? nynaeve said softly.
despite herself, egwene looked around to see if anyone was there to hear. they were alone, with the
door closed, but still she spoke just as softly. i dont know. maybe. there was no telling what aes
sedai could do  she had seen enough already to make her believe every story of their powers  and
she would not risk eavesdropping.i wont risk rand. if i did right, id tell them, but moiraine knows,
and she hasnt said anything. and its rand! i cant . i dont know what to do.



has anaiya said anything more about these dreams? nynaeve seemed to make it a point never to add
the honorific sedai, even when the two of them were alone. most of the aes sedai appeared not to care,
but the habit had earned a few strange looks, and some hard ones; she was going to train in the white
tower, after all.
the wheel weaves as the wheel wills, egwene quoted anaiya. the boy is far away, child, and
theres nothing we can do until we know more. i will see to testing you myself once we reach the white
tower, child. aaagh! sheknows there is something in these dreams. i can tell she does. i like the
woman, nynaeve; i do. but she wonttell me what i want to know. and i cant tell her everything.
maybe if i could . . .
the man in the mask again?
egwene nodded. somehow, she was sure it was better not to tell anaiya about him. she could not
imagine why, but she was sure. three times the man whose eyes were fire had been in her dreams each
time when she dreamed a dream that convinced her rand was in danger. he always wore a mask across
his face; sometimes she could see his eyes, and sometimes she could only see fire where they should be.
he laughed at me. it was so . . . contemptuous. as though i were a puppy he was going to have to push
out of his way with his foot. it frightens me. he frightens me.
are you sure it has anything to do with the other dreams, with rand? sometimes a dream is just a
dream.
egwene threw up her hands. and sometimes, nynaeve, you sound just like anaiya sedai! she put a
special emphasis on the title, and was pleased to see nynaeve grimace.
if i ever get out of this bed, egwene  
a knock at the door cut off whatever nynaeve had been going to say. before egwene could speak or
move, the amyrlin herself came in and shut the door behind her. she was alone, for a wonder; she
seldom left her cabin, and then always with leane at her side, and maybe another of the aes sedai.
egwene sprang to her feet. the room was a little crowded, with three of them in it.
both of you feeling well? the amyrlin said cheerily. she tilted her head at nynaeve. eating well, too, i
trust? in good temper?
nynaeve struggled to a sitting position, with her back against the wall. my temper is just fine, thank
you.
we are honored, mother, egwene began, but the amyrlin waved her to silence.
its good to be on the water again, but it grows boring as a mill pond after a while with nothing to do.
the ship heeled, and she shifted her balance without seeming to notice. i will give you your lesson
today. she folded herself onto the end of egwenes bed, feet tucked under her. sit, child.
egwene sat, but nynaeve began trying to push herself to her feet. i think i will go on deck.
i said, sit! the amyrlins voice cracked like a whip, but nynaeve kept rising, wavering. she still had
both hands on the bed, but she was almost upright. egwene held herself ready to catch her when she fell.



closing her eyes, nynaeve slowly lowered herself back to the bed. perhaps i will stay. it is no doubt
windy up there.
the amyrlin barked a laugh. they told me you had a temper in you like a fisherbird with a bone in its
throat. some of them, child, say youd do well for some time as a novice, no matter how old you are. i
say, if you have the ability i hear of, you deserve to be one of the accepted. she gave another laugh. i
always believe in giving people what they deserve. yes. i suspect you will learn a great deal once you
reach the white tower.
id rather one of the warders taught me how to use a sword, nynaeve growled. she swallowed
convulsively, and opened her eyes. there is someone id like to use it on. egwene looked at her
sharply; did nynaeve mean the amyrlin  which was stupid, and dangerous besides  or lan? she
snapped at egwene every time lan was mentioned.
a sword? the amyrlin said. i never thought swords were much use  even if you have the skill,
child, there are always men who have as much, and a deal more strength  but if you want a sword . . .
she held up her hand  egwene gasped, and even nynaeves eyes bulged  and there was a sword in
it. with blade and hilt of an odd bluish white, it looked somehow . . . cold. made from the air, child,
with air. its as good as most steel blades, better than most, but still not much use. the sword became a
paring knife. there was no shrinking; it just was one thing, then the other. this, now, is useful. the
paring knife turned to mist, and the mist faded away. the amyrlin put her empty hand back in her lap.
but either takes more effort than it is worth. better, easier, simply to carry a good knife with you. you
have to learn when to use your ability, as well as how, and when its better to do things the way any other
woman would. let a blacksmith make knives for gutting fish. use the one power too often and too
freely, and you can come to like it too much. that way lies danger. you begin to want more of it, and
sooner or later you run the risk of drawing more than youve learned to handle. and that can burn you
out like a guttered candle, or  
if i must learn all this, nynaeve broke in stiffly, i would as soon learn something useful. all this  this
. . . make the air stir, nynaeve. light the candle, nynaeve. now put it out. light it again. paah!
egwene closed her eyes for a moment.please, nynaeve. please keep a check on your temper . she
bit her lip to keep from saying it out loud.
the amyrlin was silent for a moment. useful, she said at last. something useful. you wanted a sword.
suppose a man came at me with a sword. what would i do? something useful, you can be sure. this, i
think.
for an instant, egwene thought she saw a glow around the woman at the other end of her bed. then the
air seemed to thicken; nothing changed that egwene could see, but she could surely feel it. she tried to lift
her arm; it did not budge any more than if she were buried to her neck in thick jelly. nothing could move
except her head.
release me! nynaeve grated. her eyes glared, and her head jerked from side to side, but the rest of
her sat as rigidly as a statue. egwene realized that she was not the only one held. let me go!
useful, wouldnt you say? and it is nothing but air. the amyrlin spoke in a conversational tone, as if
they were all chatting over tea. big man, with his muscles and his sword, and the sword does him as
much good as the hair on his chest.
let me go, i say!



and if i dont like where he is, why, i can pick him up. nynaeve squawked furiously as she slowly
rose, still in a sitting position, until her head almost touched the ceiling. the amyrlin smiled. ive often
wished i could use this to fly. the records say aes sedaicould fly, in the age of legends, but they arent
clear on how, exactly. not this way, though. it doesnt work like that. you might reach out with your
hands and pick up a chest that weighs as much as you do; you look strong. but take hold of yourself
however you will, you cannot pick yourself up.
nynaeves head jerked furiously, but not another muscle of her twitched. the light burn you, let me
go!
egwene swallowed hard and hoped she was not also to be lifted.
so, the amyrlin continued, big, hairy man, and so forth. he can do nothing to me, while i can do
anything at all to him. why, if i had a mind to  she leaned forward, her eyes intent on nynaeve;
suddenly her smile did not seem very friendly  i could turn him upside down and paddle his bottom.
just like   suddenly the amyrlin flew backwards so hard her head rebounded from the wall, and there
she stayed, as if something were pressing against her.
egwene stared, her mouth dry.this isnt happening. it isnt.
they were right, the amyrlin said. her voice sounded strained, as though she found it hard to breathe.
they said you learned quickly. and they said it took your temper burning to get to the heart of what you
can do. she took a struggling breath. shall we release each other together, child?
nynaeve, floating in the air with her eyes ablaze, said, you let me go right now, or ill   abruptly a
look of amazement came over her face, a look of loss. her mouth worked slently.
the amyrlin sat up, working her shoulders. you dont know everything yet, do you, child? not the
hundredth part of everything. you did not suspect i could cut you off from the true source. you can still
feel it there, but you cant touch it any more than a fish can touch the moon. when you learn enough to
be raised to full sisterhood, no one woman will be able to do that to you. the stronger you become, the
more aes sedai it will take to shield you against your will. do you think, now, you want to learn?
nynaeve pressed her mouth shut in a thin line and stared her in the eye grimly. the amyrlin sighed. if
you had a hair less potential than you do, child, i would send you to the mistress of novices and tell her
to keep you the rest of your life. but you will get what you deserve.
nynaeves eyes widened, and she had just time to start a yell before she dropped, hitting her bed with a
loud thud. egwene winced; the mattresses were thin, and the wood beneath hard. nynaeves face stayed
frozen as she shifted the way she sat, just a fraction.
and now, the amyrlin said firmly, unless you would like further demonstration, we will get on with
your lesson. continue your lesson, we might say.
mother? egwene said faintly. she still could not twitch below her chin.
the amyrlin looked at her questioningly, then smiled. oh. i am sorry, child. your friend was occupying
my attention, im afraid. suddenly egwene could move again; she raised her arms, just to convince
herself that she could. are you both ready to learn?
yes, mother, egwene said quickly.



the amyrlin raised an eyebrow at nynaeve.
after a moment, nynaeve said in a tight voice, yes, mother.
egwene heaved a sigh of relief.
good. now, then. empty your thoughts of everything but a flower bud.
egwene was sweating by the time the amyrlin left. she had thought some of the other aes sedai had
been hard teachers, but that smiling, plainfaced woman coaxed out every last drop of effort, drew it out,
and when there was nothing left, she seemed to reach into you and pulled it out. it had gone well, though.
as the door closed behind the amyrlin, egwene raised one hand; a tiny flame sprang to life, balanced a
hairbreadth above the tip of her forefinger, then danced from fingertip to fingertip. she was not supposed
to do this without a teacher  one of the accepted, at the very least  to watch over her, but she was
too excited at her progress to pay any mind to that.
nynaeve bounded to her feet and threw her pillow at the closing door. that  that vile, contemptible,
miserable  hag! the light burn her! id like to feed her to the fish. id like to dose her with things that
would turn her green for the rest of her life! i dont care if shes old enough to be my mother, if i had her
in emonds field, she wouldnt sit down comfortably for . . . her teeth ground so loudly that egwene
jumped.
letting the flame die, egwene put her eyes firmly on her lap. she wished she could think of a way to
sneak out of the room without catching nynaeves eye.
the lesson had not gone well for nynaeve, because she had held her temper on a tight lead until the
amyrlin was gone. she never could do very much unless she was angry, and then it all burst out of her.
after failure upon failure, the amyrlin had done everything she could to rouse her again. egwene wished
nynaeve could forget she had been there to see or hear any of it.
nynaeve stalked stiffly to her bed and stood staring at the wall behind it, her fist clenched at her side.
egwene looked longingly at the door.
it was not your fault, nynaeve said, and egwene gave a start.
nynaeve, i  
nynaeve turned to look down at her. it was not your fault, she repeated, sounding unconvinced. but
if you ever breathe one word, ill  ill . . .
not a word, egwene said quickly. i dont even remember anything to breathe a word about.
nynaeve stared at her a moment longer, then nodded. abruptly she grimaced. light, i did not think
anything tasted worse than raw sheepstongue root. ill remember that, the next time you act the goose,
so watch yourself.
egwene winced. that had been the first thing the amyrlin had done trying to rouse nynaeves anger. a
dark glob of something that glistened like grease and smelled vile had suddenly appeared and, while the
amyrlin held nynaeve with the power, had been forced into the wisdoms mouth. the amyrlin had even
held her nose to make her swallow. and nynaeve remembered things, if she had seen them done once.



egwene did not think there was any way of stopping her if she took it into her mind to do it; for all her
own success in making a flame dance,she could never have held the amyrlin against a wall. at least
being on the ship isnt making you sick anymore.
nynaeve grunted, then gave a short, sharp laugh. im too angry to be sick. with another mirthless
laugh, she shook her head. im too miserable to be sick. light, i feel as if ive been dragged through a
knothole backwards. if that is what novice training is like, you will have incentive to learn quickly.
egwene scowled at her knees. compared to nynaeve, the amyrlin had only coaxed her, smiled at her
successes, sympathized with her failures, then coaxed again. but all the aes sedai had said things would
be different in the white tower; harder, though they would not say how. if she had to go through what
nynaeve had, day after day, she did not think she could stand it.
something changed in the motion of the ship. the rocking eased, and feet thumped on the deck above
their heads. a man shouted something egwene could not quite make out.
she looked up at nynaeve. do you think . . . tar valon?
there is only one way to find out, nynaeve replied, and determinedly took her cloak from its peg.
when they reached the deck, sailors were running everywhere, heaving at lines, shortening sail, readying
long sweeps. the wind had died to a breeze, and the clouds were scattering, now.
egwene rushed to the rail. it is! it is tar valon! nynaeve joined her with an expressionless face.
the island was so big it looked more as if the river split in two than contained a bit of land. bridges that
seemed to be made of lace arched from either bank to the island, crossing marshy ground as well as the
river. the walls of the city, the shining walls of tar valon, glistened white as the sun broke through the
clouds. and on the west bank, its broken top leaking a thin wisp of smoke, dragonmount reared black
against the sky, one mountain standing among flat lands and rolling hills. dragonmount, where the dragon
had died. dragonmount, made by the dragons dying.
egwene wished she did not think of rand when she looked at the mountain.a man channeling. light,
help him.
theriver queen passed through a wide opening in a tall, circular wall that thrust out into the river.
inside, one long wharf surrounded a round harbor. sailors furled the last sails and used sweeps alone to
move the ship sternfirst to its docking. around the long wharf, the other ships that had come downriver
were now being snugged into their berths among the ships already there. the white flame banner set
workers scurrying along the already busy wharf.
the amyrlin came on deck before the shore lines were tied off, but dockworkers ran a gangplank
aboard as soon as she appeared. leane walked at her side, flametipped staff in hand, and the other aes
sedai on the ship followed them ashore. none of them so much as glanced at egwene or nynaeve. on
the wharf a delegation greeted the amyrlin  shawled aes sedai, bowing formally, kissing the amyrlins
ring. the wharf bustled, between ships unloading and the amyrlin seat arriving; soldiers formed up on
disembarking, men set booms for cargo; trumpet flourishes rang from the walls, competing with cheers
from the onlookers.
nynaeve gave a loud sniff. it seems theyve forgotten us. come along. well see to ourselves.



egwene was reluctant to leave her first sight of tar valon, but she followed nynaeve below to gather
their things. when they came back topside, bundles in their arms, soldiers and trumpets were gone 
and aes sedai, too. men were swinging back hatches along the deck and lowering cables into the holds.
on the deck, nynaeve caught a dockmans arm, a burly fellow in a coarse brown shirt with no sleeves.
our horses, she began.
im busy, he growled, pulling free. horsesll all be took to the white tower. he looked them up and
down. if youve business with the tower, best you take yourselves on. aes sedai dont hold with
newlings being tardy. another man, wrestling with a bale being swung out of the hold on a cable,
shouted to him, and he left the women without a backwards glance.
egwene exchanged looks with nynaeve. it seemed they really were on their own.
nynaeve stalked off the ship with grim determination on her face, but egwene made her way dejectedly
down the gangplank and through the tarry smell that hung over the wharf.all that talk about wanting us
here, and now they dont seem to care.
broad stairs led up from the dock to a wide arch of dark redstone. on reaching it, egwene and
nynaeve stopped to stare.
every building seemed a palace, though most of those close to the arch seemed to contain inns or shops,
from the signs over the doors. fanciful stonework was everywhere, and the lines of one structure seemed
designed to complement and set off the next, leading the eye along as if everything were part of one vast
design. some structures did not look like buildings at all, but like gigantic waves breaking, or huge shells,
or fanciful, windsculpted cliffs. right in front of the arch lay a broad square, with a fountain and trees, and
egwene could see another square further on. above everything rose the towers, tall and graceful, some
with sweeping bridges between them, high in the sky. and over all rose one tower, higher and wider than
all the rest, as white as the shining walls themselves.
fair takes the breath at first sight, said a womans voice behind them. at tenth sight, for that. and at
hundredth.
egwene turned. the woman was aes sedai; egwene was sure of it, though she wore no shawl. no one
else had that ageless look; and she held herself with an assurance, a confidence that seemed to confirm it.
a glance at her hand showed the golden ring, the serpent biting its own tail. the aes sedai was a little
plump, with a warm smile, and one of the oddestappearing women egwene had ever seen. her
plumpness could not hide high cheekbones, her eyes had a tilt to them and were the clearest, palest
green, and her hair was almost the color of fire. egwene barely stopped herself from goggling at that hair,
those slightly slanted eyes.
ogier built, of course, the aes sedai went on, and their best work ever, some say. one of the first
cities built after the breaking. there werent half a thousand people here altogether then  no more than
twenty sisters  but they built for what would be needed.
it is a lovely city, nynaeve said. we are supposed to go to the white tower. we came here for
training, but no one seems to care if we go or stay.
they care, the woman said, smiling. i came here to meet you, but i was delayed speaking with the
amyrlin. i am sheriam, the mistress of novices.



i am not to be a novice, nynaeve said in a firm voice, but a little too quickly. the amyrlin herself said
i was to be one of the accepted.
so i was told. sheriam sounded amused. i have never heard of it being done so before, but they say
you are . . . exceptional. remember, though, even one of the accepted can be called to my study. it
requires more breaking of the rules than for a novice, but it has been known to happen. she turned to
egwene as if she had not seen nynaeve frown. and you are our new novice. it is always good to see a
novice come. we have too few, these days. you will make forty . . . only forty. and no more than eight
or nine of those will be raised to the accepted. though i dont think you will have to worry about that
too much, if you work hard and apply yourself. the work is hard, and even for one with the potential
they tell me you have, it will not be made any easier. if you cannot stick to it, no matter how hard it is, or
if you will break under the strain, better we find it out now, and let you go on your way, than wait until
you are a full sister and others are depending on you. an aes sedais life is not easy. here, we will
prepare you for it, if you have in you what is required.
egwene swallowed.break under the strain? i will try, sheriam sedai, she said faintly.and i will not
break.
nynaeve looked at her worriedly. sheriam . . . she stopped and took a deep breath. sheriam sedai
 she seemed to force the honorific out  does it have to be so hard on her? flesh and blood can
only take so much. i know . . . something . . . of what novices must go through. surely theres no need to
try to break her just to find out how strong she is.
you mean what the amyrlin did to you today? nynaeves back stiffened; sheriam looked as though
she were trying to keep amusement from her face. i told you i spoke with the amyrlin. rest your
worries for your friend. novice training is hard, but not that hard. that is for the first few weeks of being
one of the accepted. nynaeves mouth fell open; egwene thought the wisdoms eyes were going to
come right out of her head. to catch the few who might have slipped through novice training when they
should not have. we cannot risk having one of our number  a full aes sedai  who will break under
the stress of the world outside. the aes sedai gathered them both up, an arm around the shoulders of
each. nynaeve hardly seemed to realize where she was going. come, sheriam said, i will see you
settled in your rooms. the white tower awaits.

chapter 19

beneath the dagger

night on the edge of kinslayers dagger was cold, as nights in the mountains are always cold. the wind
whipped down from the high peaks carrying the iciness of the snowcaps. rand shifted on the hard



ground, tugging at his cloak and blanket, and only half asleep. his hand went to his sword, lying beside
him.one more day , he thought drowsily.just one more, and then we go. if no one comes tomorrow,
ingtar or darkfriends one, ill take selene to cairhien.
he had told himself that before. every day they had been there on the mountainside, watching the place
where hurin said the trail had been, in that other world  where selene said the darkfriends would
surely appear in this world  he told himself it was time to leave. and selene talked of the horn of
valere, and touched his arm, and looked into his eyes, and before he knew it he had agreed to yet
another day before they went on.
he shrugged against the chill of the wind, thinking of selene touching his arm and looking into his eyes.if
egwene saw that, shed shear me for a sheep, and selene, too. egwene could already be in tar
valon by now, learning to be an aes sedai. the next time she sees me, shell probably try to gentle
me.
as he shifted over, his hand slid past the sword and touched the bundle holding thom merrilins harp
and flute. unconsciously, his fingers tightened on the gleemans cloak.i was happy then, i think, even
running for my life. playing the flute for my supper. i was too ignorant to know what was going
on. theres no turning back.
shivering, he opened his eyes. the only light came from the waning moon, not far past full and low in the
sky. a fire would give them away to those for whom they watched. loial muttered in his sleep, a low
rumble. one of the horses stamped a hoof. hurin had the first watch, from a stone outcrop a little way up
the mountain; he would be coming to wake rand for his turn, soon.
rand rolled over . . . and stopped. in the moonlight he could see the shape of selene, bending over his
saddlebags, her hands on the buckles. her white dress gathered the faint light. do you need something?
she gave a jump, and stared toward him. you  you startled me.
he rolled to his feet, shedding the blanket and wrapping the cloak around himself, and went to her. he
was sure he had left the saddlebags right by his side when he lay down; he always kept them close. he
took them from her. all the buckles were fastened, even those on the side that held the damning banner.
how can my life depend on keeping it? if anybody sees it and knows what it is, ill die for having
it . he peered at her suspiciously.
selene stayed where she was, looking up at him. the moon glistened in her dark eyes. it came to me,
she said, that ive been wearing this dress too long. i could brush it, at least, if i had something else to
wear while i did. one of your shirts, perhaps.
rand nodded, feeling a sudden relief. her dress looked as clean to him as when he first saw her, but he
knew that if a spot appeared on egwenes dress, nothing would do but that she cleaned it immediately.
of course. he opened the capacious pocket into which he had stuffed everything except the banner
and pulled out one of the white silk shirts.
thank you. her hands went behind her back. to the buttons, he realized.
eyes wide, he spun away from her.
if you could help me with these, it would be much easier.



rand cleared his throat. it would not be proper. it isnt as if we were promised, or . . .stop thinking
about that! you can never marry anyone . it just wouldnt be proper.
her soft laugh sent a shiver down his back, as if she had run a finger along his spine. he tried not to
listen to the rustlings behind him. he said, ah . . . tomorrow . . . tomorrow, well leave for cairhien.
and what of the horn of valere?
maybe we were wrong. maybe they are not coming here at all. hurin says there are a number of
passes through kinslayers dagger. if they went only a little further west, they do not have to come into
the mountains at all.
but the trail we followed came here. they will come here. the horn will come here. you may turn
around, now.
you say that, but we dont know . . . he turned, and the words died in his mouth. her dress lay
across her arm, and she wore his shirt, hanging in baggy folds on her. it was a longtailed shirt, made for
his height, but she was tall for a woman. the bottom of it came little more than halfway down her thighs.
it was not as if he had never seen a girls legs before; girls in the two rivers always tied up their skirts to
go wading in waterwood ponds. but they stopped doing it well before they were old enough to braid
their hair, and this was in the dark, besides. the moonlight seemed to make her skin glow.
what is it you dont know, rand?
the sound of her voice unfroze his joints. with a loud cough, he whirled to face the other way. ah . . . i
think . . . ah . . . i . . . ah . . .
think of the glory, rand. her hand touched his back, and he almost shamed himself with a squeak.
think of the glory that will come to the one who finds the horn of valere. how proud ill be to stand
beside him who holds the horn. you have no idea the heights we will scale together, you and i. with the
horn of valere in your hand, you can be a king. you can be another artur hawkwing. you . . .
lord rand! hurin panted into the campsite. my lord, they . . . he skidded to a halt, suddenly
making a gurgling sound. his eyes dropped to the ground, and he stood wringing his hands. forgive me,
my lady. i didnt mean to . . . i . . . forgive me.
loial sat up, his blanket and cloak falling away. whats happening? is it my turn to watch already? he
looked toward rand and selene, and even in the moonlight the widening of his eyes was plain.
rand heard selene sigh behind him. he stepped away from her, still not looking at her.her legs are so
white, so smooth . what is it, hurin? he made his voice more moderate; was he angry with hurin,
himself, or selene?no reason to be angry with her . did you see something, hurin?
the sniffer spoke without raising his eyes. a fire, my lord, down in the hills. i didnt see it at first. they
made it small, and hid it, but they hid it from somebody following them, not somebody ahead, and up
above. two miles, lord rand. less than three, for sure.
fain, rand said. ingtar would not be afraid of anyone following him. it must be fain. suddenly he
did not know what to do, now. they had been waiting for fain, but now that the man was only a mile or
so away, he was uncertain. in the morning . . . in the morning, we will follow. when ingtar and the
others catch up, well be able to point right to them.



so, selene said. you will let this ingtar take the horn of valere. and the glory.
i dont want . . . without thinking, he turned, and there she was, legs pale in the moonlight, and as
unconcerned that they were bare as if she were alone.as if we were alone , the thought came.she wants
the man who finds the horn . three of us cannot take it away from them. ingtar has twenty lances
with him.
you dont know you cannot take it. how many followers does this man have? you dont know that,
either. her voice was calm, but intent. you dont even know if these men camped down there do have
the horn. the only way is to go down yourself and see. take thealantin ; his kind have sharp eyes, even
by moonlight. and he has the strength to carry the horn in its chest, if you make the right decision.
shes right. you do not know for sure if its fain. a fine thing it would be to have hurin casting about
for a trail that was not there, all of them out in the open if the real darkfriends did finally come. i will go
alone, he said. hurin and loial will stand guard for you.
laughing, selene came to him so gracefully it almost seemed she danced. moonshadows veiled her face
in mystery as she looked up at him, and mystery made her even more beautiful. i am capable of
guarding myself, until you return to protect me. take thealantin .
she is right, rand, loial said, rising. i can see better by moonlight than you. with my eyes, we may
not need to go as close as you would alone.
very well. rand strode over to his sword and buckled it at his waist. bow and quiver he left where
they lay; a bow was not of much use in the dark, and he intended to look, not fight. hurin, show me this
fire.
the sniffer led him scrambling up the slope to the outcrop, like a huge stone thumb thrust out of the
mountain. the fire was only a speck  he missed it the first time hurin pointed. whoever had made it
did not mean for it to be seen. he fixed it in his head.
by the time they returned to the camp, loial had saddled red and his own horse. as rand climbed to
the bays back, selene caught his hand. remember the glory, she said softly. remember. the shirt
seemed to fit her better than he recalled, molding itself to her form.
he drew a deep breath and took his hand back. guard her with your life, hurin. loial? he heeled
reds flanks gently. the ogiers big mount plodded along behind.
they did not try to move quickly. night shrouded the mountainside, and mooncast shadows made
footing uncertain. rand could not see the fire any longer  no doubt it was better hidden from eyes on
the same level  but he had its location in his mind. for someone who had learned to hunt in the tangle
of the westwood, in the two rivers, finding the fire would be no great difficulty.and what then?
selenes face loomed before him.how proud ill be to stand beside him who holds the horn.
loial, he said suddenly, trying to clear his thoughts, whats thisalantin she calls you?
its the old tongue, rand. the ogiers horse picked its way uncertainly, but he guided it almost as
surely as if it were daylight. it means brother, and is short fortia avende alantin . brother to the trees.
treebrother. it is very formal, but then, ive heard the cairhienin are formal. the noble houses are, at
least. the common people i saw there were not very formal at all.



rand frowned. a shepherd would not be very acceptable to a formal cairhienin noble house.light,
mats right about you. youre crazy, and with a big head to boot. but if i could marry . . .
he wished he could stop thinking, and before he realized it, the void had formed within him, making
thoughts distant things, as if part of someone else.saidin shone at him, beckoned to him. he gritted his
teeth and ignored it; it was like ignoring a burning coal inside his head, but at least he could hold it at bay.
barely. he almost left the void, but the darkfriends were out there in the night, and closer, now. and the
trollocs. he needed the emptiness, needed even the uneasy calm of the void.i dont have to touch it. i
dont.
after a time, he reined in red. they stood at the base of a hill, the widescattered trees on its slopes
black in the night. i think we must be close by now, he said softly. best we go the rest of the way on
foot. he slid from the saddle and tied the bays reins to a branch.
are you all right? loial whispered, climbing down. you sound odd.
im fine. his voice sounded tight, he realized. stretched.saidin called to him.no! be careful. i cant
be sure exactly how far it is, but that fire should be somewhere just ahead of us. on the hilltop, i think.
the ogier nodded.
slowly rand stole from tree to tree, placing each foot carefully, holding his sword tight so it did not
clatter against a tree trunk. he was grateful for the lack of undergrowth. loial followed like a big
shadow; rand could not see much more of him than that. everything was moonshadows and darkness.
suddenly some trick of the moonlight resolved the shadows ahead of him, and he froze, touching the
rough bole of a leatherleaf. dim mounds on the ground became men wrapped in blankets, and apart from
them a group of larger mounds. sleeping trollocs. they had doused the fire. one moonbeam, moving
through the branches, caught a shine of gold and silver on the ground, halfway between the two groups.
the moonlight seemed to brighten; for an instant he could see clearly. the shape of a sleeping man lay
close by to the gleam, but that was not what held his eye.the chest. the horn . and something atop it, a
point of red flashing in the moonbeam.the dagger! why would fain put . . .?
loials huge hand settled over rands mouth, and a good part of his face besides. he twisted to look at
the ogier. loial pointed off to his right, slowly, as if motion might attract attention.
at first rand could not see anything, then a shadow moved, not ten paces away. a tall, bulky shadow,
and snouted. rands breath caught. a trolloc. it lifted its snout as if sniffing. some of them hunted by
scent.
for an instant the void wavered. someone stirred in the darkfriend camp, and the trolloc turned to peer
that way.
rand froze, letting the calm of emptiness envelope him. his hand was on his sword, but he did not think
of it. the void was all. whatever happened, happened. he watched the trolloc without blinking.
a moment longer the snouted shadow watched the darkfriend camp, then, as if satisfied, folded itself
down beside a tree. almost immediately a low sound, like coarse cloth ripping, drifted from it.
loial put his mouth close to rands ear. its asleep, he whispered incredulously.



rand nodded. tam had told him trollocs were lazy, apt to give up any task but killing unless fear kept
them to it. he turned back to the camp.
all was still and quiet there again. the moonbeam no longer shone on the chest, but he knew now which
shadow it was. he could see it in his mind, floating beyond the void, glittering golden, chased with silver,
in the glow ofsaidin . the horn of valere and the dagger mat needed, both almost within reach of his
hand. selenes face drifted with the chest. they could follow fains party in the morning, and wait until
ingtar joined them. if ingtar did come, if he still followed the trail without his sniffer. no, there would
never be a better chance. all within reach of his hand. selene was waiting on the mountain.
motioning for loial to follow, rand dropped to his belly and crawled toward the chest. he heard the
ogiers muffled gasp, but his eyes were fixed on that one shadowed mound ahead.
darkfriends and trollocs lay to left and right of him, but once he had seen tam stalk close enough to a
deer to put his hand on its flank before the animal bounded off; he had tried to learn from tam.madness!
the thought flew by dimly, almost out of reach.this is madness! you are going mad! dim
thoughts; someone elses thoughts.
slowly, silently, he slithered to that one special shadow, and put out a hand. ornate traceries worked in
gold met his touch. it was the chest that held the horn of valere. his hand touched something else, on
the lid. the dagger, barebladed. in the dark, his eyes widened. remembering what it had done to mat,
he jerked back, the void shifting with his agitation.
the man sleeping nearby  no more than two paces from the chest; no one else lay so close by spans
 groaned in his sleep and thrashed at his blankets. rand allowed the void to sweep thought and fear
away. murmuring uneasily in his sleep, the man stilled.
rand let his hand go back to the dagger, not quite touching it. it had not harmed mat in the beginning.
not much, at least; not quickly. in one swift motion he lifted the dagger, stuck it behind his belt, and
pulled his hand away, as if it might help to minimize the time it touched his bare skin. perhaps it would,
and mat would die without the dagger. he could feel it there, almost a weight pulling him down, pressing
against him. but in the void sensation was as distant as thought, and the feel of the dagger faded quickly
to something he was used to.
he wasted only a moment more staring at the shadowwrapped chest  the horn had to be inside, but
he did not know how to open it and he could not lift it by himself  then he looked around for loial. he
found the ogier crouched not far behind him, massive head swiveling as he peered back and forth from
sleeping human darkfriends to sleeping trollocs. even in the night it was plain loials eyes were as wide
as they could go; they looked as big as saucers in the light of the moon. rand reached out and took
loials hand.
the ogier gave a start and gasped. rand put a finger across his lips, set loials hand on the chest, and
mimed lifting. for a time  it seemed forever, in the night, with darkfriends and trollocs all around; it
could not have been more than heartbeats  loial stared. then, slowly, he put his arms around the
golden chest and stood. he made it seem effortless.
ever so carefully, even more carefully than he had come in, rand began to walk out of the camp, behind
loial and the chest. both hands on his sword, he watched the sleeping darkfriends, the still shapes of the
trollocs. all those shadowed figures began to be swallowed deeper in the darkness as they drew away.
almost free. weve done it!



the man who had been sleeping near the chest suddenly sat up with a strangled yell, then leaped to his
feet. its gone! wake, you filth! its gooonnne! fains voice; even in the void rand recognized it. the
others scrambled erect, darkfriends and trollocs, calling to know what was happening, growling and
snarling. fains voice rose to a howl. i know it is you, althor! youre hiding from me, but i know you
are out there! find him! find him! althoooor! men and trollocs scattered in every direction.
wrapped in emptiness, rand kept moving. almost forgotten in entering the camp,saidin pulsed at him.
he cannot see us, loial whispered low. once we reach the horses  
a trolloc leaped out of the dark at them, cruel eagles beak in a mans face where mouth and nose
should have been, scythelike sword already whistling through the air.
rand moved without thought. he was one with the blade. cat dances on the wall. the trolloc
screamed as it fell, screamed again as it died.
run, loial! rand commanded.saidin called to him. run!
he was dimly aware of loial lumbering to an awkward gallop, but another trolloc loomed from the
night, boarsnouted and tusked, spiked axe raised. smoothly rand glided between trolloc and ogier;
loial must get the horn away. head and shoulders taller than rand, half again as wide, the trolloc came
at him with a silent snarl. the courtier taps his fan. no scream, this time. he walked backwards after
loial, watching the night.saidin sang to him, such a sweet song.the power could burn them all, burn
fain and all the rest to cinders. no!
two more trollocs, wolf and ram, gleaming teeth and curling horns. lizard in the thornbush. he rose
smoothly from one knee as the second toppled, horns almost brushing his shoulder. the song ofsaidin
caressed him with seduction, pulled him with a thousand silken strings.burn them all with the power.
no. no! better dead than that. if i were dead, it would be done with.
a knot of trollocs came into sight, hunting uncertainly. three of them, four. suddenly one pointed to
rand and raised a howl the rest answered as they charged.
let it be done with! rand shouted, and leaped to meet them.
for an instant surprise slowed them, then they came on with guttural cries, gleeful, bloodthirsty, swords
and axes raised. he danced among them to the song ofsaidin . hummingbird kisses the honeyrose. so
cunning that song, filling him. cat on hot sand. the sword seemed alive in his hands as it had never been
before, and he fought as if a heronmark blade could keepsaidin from him. the heron spreads its
wings.
rand stared at the motionless shapes on the ground around him. better to be dead, he murmured. he
raised his eyes, back up the hill toward where the camp lay. fain was there, and darkfriends, and more
trollocs. too many to fight. too many to face and live. he took a step that way. another.
rand, come on! loials urgent, whispered call drifted through the emptiness to him. for life and the
light, rand, come on!
carefully, rand bent to wipe his blade on a trollocs coat. then, as formally as if lan were watching
him train, he sheathed it.



rand!
as though he knew of no urgency, rand joined loial by the horses. the ogier was tying the golden
chest atop his saddle with straps from his saddlebags. his cloak was stuffed underneath to help balance
the chest on the rounded saddle seat.
saidinsang no more. it was there, that stomachturning glow, but it held back as if he truly had fought it
off. wonderingly, he let the void vanish. i think i am going mad, he said. suddenly realizing where they
were, he peered back the way they had come. shouts and howls came from half a dozen different
directions; signs of search, but none of pursuit. yet. he swung up onto reds back.
sometimes i do not understand half of what you say, loial said. if you must go mad, could it at least
wait until we are back with the lady selene and hurin?
how are you going to ride with that in your saddle?
i will run! the ogier suited his words by breaking into a quick trot, pulling his horse behind him by the
reins. rand followed.
the pace loial set was as fast as a horse could trot. rand was sure the ogier could not keep it for long,
but loials feet did not flag. rand decided that his boast of once outrunning a horse might really be true.
now and again loial looked behind them as he ran, but the shouts of darkfriends and howls of trollocs
faded with distance.
even when the ground began to slope upwards more sharply, loials pace barely slowed, and he trotted
into their campsite on the mountainside with only a little hard breathing.
you have it. selenes voice was exultant as her gaze rested on the ornately worked chest on loials
saddle. she was wearing her own dress again; it looked as white as new snow to rand. i knew you
would make the right choice. may i . . . have a look at it?
did any of them follow, my lord? hurin asked anxiously. he stared at the chest with awe, but his eyes
slid off into the night, down the mountain. if they followed, well have to move quick.
i do not think they did. go to the outcrop and see if you can see anything. rand climbed down from
his saddle as hurin hurried up the mountain. selene, i dont know how to open the chest. loial, do
you? the ogier shook his head.
let me try . . . even for a woman of selenes height, loials saddle was high above the ground. she
reached up to touch the finely wrought patterns on the chest, ran her hands across them, pressed. there
was a click, and she pushed the lid up, let it fall open.
as she stretched on tiptoe to put a hand inside, rand reached over her shoulder and lifted out the horn
of valere. he had seen it once before, but never touched it. though beautifully made, it did not look a
thing of great age, or power. a curled golden horn, gleaming in the faint light, with inlaid silver script
flowing around the mouth of the bell. he touched the strange letters with a finger. they seemed to catch
the moon.
tia mi aven moridin isainde vadin, selene said. the grave is no bar to my call. youwill be
greater than artur hawkwing ever was.



i am taking it to shienar, to lord agelmar.it should go to tar valon, he thought, but im done
with aes sedai. let agelmar or ingtar take it to them . he set the horn back in the chest; it cast
back the moonlight, pulled the eye.
that is madness, selene said.
rand flinched at the word. mad or not, it is what im doing. i told you, selene, i want no part of
greatness. back there, i thought i did. for a while, i thought i wanted things . . .light, shes so
beautiful. egwene. selene. im not worthy of either of them . something seemed to take hold of
me. saidincame for me, but i fought it off with a sword. or is that mad, too? he breathed deeply.
shienar is where the horn of valere belongs. or if not there, lord agelmar will know what to do with
it.
hurin appeared from up the mountain. the fires there again, lord rand, and bigger than ever. and i
thought i heard shouting. it was all down in the hills. i dont think theyve come upon the mountain, yet.
you misunderstand me, rand, selene said. you cannot go back, now. you are committed. those
friends of the dark will not simply go away because youve taken the horn from them. far from it.
unless you know some way to kill them all, they will be hunting you now as you hunted them before.
no! loial and hurin looked surprised at rands vehemence. he softened his tone. i dont know any
way to kill them all. they can live forever for all of me.
selenes long hair shifted in waves as she shook her head. then you cannot go back, only onward. you
can reach the safety of cairhiens walls long before you could return to shienar. does the thought of a
few more days in my company seem so onerous?
rand stared at the chest. selenes company was far from burdensome, but near her he could not help
thinking things he should not. still, trying to ride back north meant risking fain and his followers. she was
right in that. fain would never give up. ingtar would not give up, either. if ingtar came on southward, and
rand knew of no reason for him to turn aside, he would arrive at cairhien, soon or late.
cairhien, he agreed. you will have to show me where you live, selene. ive never been to cairhien.
he reached to close the chest.
you took something else from the friends of the dark? selene said. you spoke earlier of a dagger.
how could i forget?he left the chest as it was and pulled the dagger from his belt. the bare blade
curved like a horn, and the quillons were golden serpents. set in the hilt, a ruby as big as his thumbnail
winked like an evil eye in the moonlight. ornate as it was, tainted as he knew it was, it felt no different
from any other knife.
be careful, selene said. do not cut yourself.
rand felt a shiver inside. if simply carrying it was dangerous, he did not want to know what a cut from it
would do. this is from shadar logoth, he told the others. it will twist whoever carries it for long, taint
them to the bone the way shadar logoth is tainted. without aes sedai healing, that taint will kill,
eventually.
so that is what ails mat, loial said softly. i never suspected. hurin stared at the dagger in rands
hand and wiped his own hands on the front of his coat. the sniffer did not look happy.



none of us must handle it any more than is necessary, rand went on. i will find some way to carry it

it is dangerous. selene frowned at the blade as if the snakes were real, and poisonous. throw it
away. leave it, or bury it if you wish to keep it from other hands, but be rid of it.
mat needs it, rand said firmly.
it is too dangerous. you said so yourself.
he needs it. the am . . . the aes sedai said he would die without it to use in healing him.they still
have a string on him, but this blade will cut it. until im rid of it, and the horn, they have a string
on me, but ill not dance however much they pull.
he set the dagger in the chest, inside the curl of the horn  there was just room for it  and pulled the
lid down. it locked with a sharp snap. that should shield us from it. he hoped it would. lan said the
time to sound most sure was when you were least certain.
the chest will surely shield us, selene said in a tight voice. and now i mean to finish what is left of my
nights sleep.
rand shook his head. we are too close. fain seems able to find me, sometimes.
seek the oneness if you are afraid, selene said.
i want to be as far from those darkfriends come morning as we can be. i will saddle your mare.
stubborn! she sounded angry, and when he looked at her, her mouth curved in a smile that never
came close to her dark eyes. a stubborn man is best, once . . . her voice trailed off, and that worried
him. women often seemed to leave things unsaid, and in his limited experience it was what they did not
say that proved the most trouble. she watched in silence as he slung her saddle onto the white mares
back and bent to fashion the girths.
gather them all in! fain snarled. the goatsnouted trolloc backed away from him. the fire, piled high
with wood now, lit the hilltop with flickering shadows. his human followers huddled near the blaze,
fearful to be out in the dark with the rest of the trollocs. gather them, every one that still lives, and if any
think to run, let them know theyll get what that one got. he gestured to the first trolloc that had brought
him word althor was not to be found. it still snapped at ground muddied with its own blood, hooves
scraping trenches as they jerked. go, fain whispered, and the goatsnouted trolloc ran into the night.
fain glanced contemptuously at the other humans theyll have their uses still  then turned to stare
into the night, toward kinslayers dagger. althor was up there, somewhere, in the mountains. with the
horn. his teeth grated audibly at the thought. he did not know where, exactly, but something pulled him
toward the mountains. toward althor. that much of the dark ones . . . gift . . . remained to him. he
had hardly thought of it, had tried not to think of it, until suddenly, after the horn was gone gone! 
althor was there, drawing him as meat draws a starving dog.
i am a dog no longer. a dog no longer! he heard the others shifting uneasily around the fire, but he
ignored them. you will pay for what was done to me, althor! the world will pay! he cackled at the
night with mad laughter. the world will pay!



chapter 20

saidin

rand kept them moving through the night, allowing only a brief stop at dawn, to rest the horses. and to
allow loial rest. with the horn of valere in its goldandsilver chest occupying his saddle, the ogier
walked or trotted ahead of his big horse, never complaining, never slowing them. sometime during the
night they had crossed the border of cairhien.
i want to see it again, selene said as they halted. she dismounted and strode to loials horse. their
shadows, long and thin, pointed west from the sun just peeking over the horizon. bring it down for me,
alantin . loial began to undo the straps. the horn of valere.
no, rand said, climbing down from reds back. loial, no. the ogier looked from rand to selene,
his ears twitching doubtfully, but he took his hands away.
i want to see the horn, selene demanded. rand was sure she was no older than he, but at that
moment she suddenly seemed as old and as cold as the mountains, and more regal than queen morgase
at her haughtiest.
i think we should keep the dagger shielded, rand said. for all i know, looking at it may be as bad as
touching it. let it stay where it is until i can put it in mats hands. he  he can take it to the aes sedai.
and what price will they demand for that healing? but he hasnt any choice . he felt a little guilty
over feeling relief that he, at least, was through with aes sedai.i am done with them. one way or
another.
the dagger! all you seem to care about is that dagger. i told you to be rid of it. the horn of valere,
rand.
no.
she came to him, a sway in her walk that made him feel as if he had something caught in his throat. all i
want is to see it in the light of day. i wont even touch it. you hold it. it would be something for me to
remember, you holding the horn of valere in your hands. she took his hands as she said it; her touch
made his skin tingle and his mouth go dry.
something to remember  when she had gone . . . he could close the dagger up again as soon as the
horn was out of the chest. it would be something to hold the horn in his hands where he could see it in



the light.
he wished he knew more of the prophecies of the dragon. the one time he heard a merchants guard
telling a part of it, back in emonds field, nynaeve had broken a broom across the mans shoulders.
none of the little he had heard mentioned the horn of valere.
aes sedai trying to make me do what they want. selene was still gazing intently into his eyes, her face
so young and beautiful that he wanted to kiss her despite what he was thinking. he had never seen an
aes sedai act the way she did, and she looked young, not ageless.a girl my age couldnt be aes
sedai. but . . .
selene, he said softly, areyou an aes sedai?
aes sedai, she almost spat, flinging his hands away. aes sedai! always you hurl that at me! she
took a deep breath and smoothed her dress, as if gathering herself. i am what and who i am. and i am
no aes sedai! and she wrapped herself in a silent coldness that made even the morning sun seem chill.
loial and hurin bore it all with as good a grace as they could manage, trying to make conversation and
hiding their embarrassment when she froze them with a look. they rode on.
by the time they made camp that night beside a mountain stream that provided fish for their supper,
selene seemed to have regained some of her temper, chatting with the ogier about books, speaking
kindly to hurin.
she barely spoke to rand, though, unless he spoke first, either that evening or the following day as they
rode through mountains that reared on either side of them like huge, jagged gray walls, ever climbing. but
whenever he looked at her, she was watching him and smiling. sometimes it was the sort of smile that
made him smile back, sometimes the sort that made him clear his throat and blush at his own thoughts,
and sometimes the mysterious, knowing smile that egwene sometimes wore. it was a kind of smile that
always put his back up  but at least it was a smile.
shecantbe aes sedai.
the way began to slope downwards, and with the promise of twilight in the air, kinslayers dagger at
last gave way to hills, rolling and round, with more brush than trees, more thickets than forest. there was
no road, just a dirt track, such as might be used by a few carts now and again. fields carved some of the
hills into terraces, fields full of crops but empty of people at this hour. none of the scattered farm
buildings lay close enough to the path they rode for rand to make out more than that they were all made
of stone.
when he saw the village ahead, lights already twinkled in a few windows against the coming of night.
well sleep in beds tonight, he said.
that i will enjoy, lord rand. hurin laughed. loial nodded agreement.
a village inn, selene sniffed. dirty, no doubt, and full of unwashed men swilling ale. why cant we
sleep under the stars again? i find i enjoy sleeping under the stars.
you would not enjoy it if fain caught up with us while we slept, rand said, him and those trollocs.
hes coming after me, selene. after the horn, too, but it is me he can find. why do you think ive kept



such a close watch these past nights?
if fain catches us, you will deal with him. her voice was coolly confident. and there could be
darkfriends in the village, too.
but even if they knew who we are, they cant do much with the rest of the villagers around. not unless
you think everyone in the village is a darkfriend.
and if they discover you carry the horn? whether you want greatness or not, even farmers dream of
it.
she is right, rand, loial said. i fear even farmers might want to take it.
unroll your blanket, loial, and throw it over the chest. keep it covered. loial complied, and rand
nodded. it was obvious there was a box or chest beneath the ogiers striped blanket, but nothing
suggested it was more than a travel chest. my ladys chest of clothes, rand said with a grin and a
bow.
selene met his sally with silence and an unreadable look. after a moment, they started on again.
almost immediately, off to rands left, a glitter from the setting sun reflected from something on the
ground. something large. something very large, by the light it threw up. curious, he turned his horse that
way.
my lord? hurin said. the village?
i just want to see this first, rand said.its brighter than sunlight on water. what can it be?
his eyes on the reflection, he was surprised when red suddenly stopped. on the point of urging the bay
on, he realized that they stood on the edge of a clay precipice, above a huge excavation. most of the hill
had been dug away to a depth of easily a hundred paces. certainly more than one hill had vanished, and
maybe some farmers fields, for the hole was at least ten times as wide as it was deep. the far side
appeared to have been packed hard to a ramp. there were men on the bottom, a dozen of them, getting
a fire started; down there, night was already descending. here and there among them armor turned the
light, and swords swung at their sides. he hardly glanced at them.
out of the clay at the bottom of the pit slanted a gigantic stone hand holding a crystal sphere, and it was
this that shone with the last sunlight. rand gaped at the size of it, a smooth ball  he was sure not so
much as a scratch marred its surface  at least twenty paces through.
some distance away from the hand, a stone face in proportion had been uncovered. a bearded mans
face, it thrust out of the soil with the dignity of vast years; the broad features seemed to hold wisdom and
knowledge.
unsummoned, the void formed, whole and complete in an instant,saidin glowing, beckoning. so intent
was he on the face and the hand that he did not even realize what had happened. he had once heard a
ship captain speak of a giant hand holding a huge crystal sphere; bayle domon had claimed it stuck out
of a hill on the island of tremalking.
this is dangerous, selene said. come away, rand.



i believe i can find a way down there, he said absently.saidin sang to him. the huge ball seemed to
glow white with the light of the sinking sun. it seemed to him that in the depths of the crystal, light swirled
and danced in time to the song ofsaidin . he wondered why the men below did not appear to notice.
selene rode close and took hold of his arm. please, rand, you must come away. he looked at her
hand, puzzled, then followed her arm up to her face. she seemed genuinely worried, perhaps even afraid.
if this bank doesnt give way beneath our horses and break our necks with the fall, those men are
guards, and no one puts guards on something they wish every passerby to examine. what good will it do
you to avoid fain, if some lords guards arrest you? come away.
suddenly  a drifting, distant thought  he realized that the void surrounded him.saidin sang, and the
sphere pulsed  even without looking, he could feel it  and the thought came that if he sang the song
saidin sang, that huge stone face would open its mouth and sing with him. with him and withsaidin . all
one.
please, rand, selene said. i will go to the village with you. i wont mention the horn again. only
come away!
he released the void . . . and it did not go.saidin crooned, and the light in the sphere beat like a heart.
like his heart. loial, hurin, selene, they all stared at him, but they seemed oblivious to the glorious blaze
from the crystal. he tried to push the void away. it held like granite; he floated in an emptiness as hard as
stone. the song ofsaidin , the song of the sphere, he could feel them quivering along his bones. grimly,
he refused to give in, reached deep inside himself . . .i will not . . .
rand. he did not know whose voice it was.
. . . reached for the core of who he was, the core of what he was . . .
. . .will not . . .
rand. the song filled him, filled the emptiness
. . . touched stone, hot from a pitiless sun, cold from a merciless night . . .
. . .not . . .
light filled him, blinded him.
till shade is gone, he mumbled, till water is gone . . .
power filled him. he was one with the sphere.
. . . into the shadow with teeth bared . . . 
the power was his. the power was his.
. . . to spit in sightblinder s eye . . .
power to break the world.
. . . on the last day! it came out as a shout, and the void was gone. red shied at his cry; clay crumbled



under the stallions hoof, spilling into the pit. the big bay went to his knees. rand leaned forward,
gathering the reins, and red scrambled to safety, away from the edge.
they were all staring at him, he saw. selene, loial, hurin, all of them. what happened?the void . . .
he touched his forehead. the void had not gone when he released it, and the glow ofsaidin had grown
stronger, and . . . he could not remember anything more.saidin . he felt cold. did i . . . do something?
he frowned, trying to remember. did i say something?
you just sat there stiff as a statue, loial said, mumbling to yourself no matter what anyone said. i
couldnt make out what you were saying, not until you shouted day! loud enough to wake the dead and
nearly put your horse over the edge. are you ill? youre acting more and more oddly every day.
im not sick, rand said harshly, then softened it. i am all right, loial.  selene watched him warily.
from the pit came the sound of men calling, the words indistinguishable.
lord rand, hurin said, i think those guards have finally noticed us. if they know a way up this side,
they could be here any minute.
yes, selene said. let us leave here quickly.
rand glanced at the excavation, then away again, quickly. the great crystal held nothing except reflected
light from the evening sun, but he did not want to look at it. he could almost remember . . .something
about the sphere. i dont see any reason to wait for them. we didnt do anything. lets find an inn. he
turned red toward the village, and they soon left pit and shouting guards behind.
as many villages did, tremonsien covered the top of a hill, but like the farms they had passed, this hill
had been sculpted into terraces with stone retaining walls. square stone houses sat on precise plots of
land, with exact gardens behind, along a few straight streets that crossed each other at right angles. the
necessity of a curve to streets going around the hill seemed begrudged.
yet the people seemed open and friendly enough, pausing to nod to each other as they hurried about
their last chores before nightfall. they were a short folk  none taller than rands shoulder, and few as
tall as hurin  with dark eyes and pale, narrow faces, and dressed in dark clothes except for a few who
wore slashes of color across the chest. smells of cooking  oddly spiced, to rands nose  filled the
air, though a handful of goodwives still hung over their doors to talk; the doors were split, so the top
could stand open while the bottom was closed. the people eyed the newcomers curiously, with no sign
of hostility. a few stared a moment longer at loial, an ogier walking alongside a horse as big as a
dhurran stallion, but never more than a moment longer.
the inn, at the very top of the hill, was stone like every other building in the town, and plainly marked by
a painted sign hanging over the wide doors. the nine rings. rand swung down with a smile and tied
red to one of the hitching posts out front. the nine rings had been one of his favorite adventure
stories when he was a boy; he supposed it still was.
selene still seemed uneasy when he helped her dismount. are you all right? he asked. i didnt frighten
you back there, did i? red would never fall over a cliff with me. he wondered what had really
happened.
you terrified me, she said in a tight voice, and i do not frighten easily. you could have killed yourself,
killed . . . she smoothed her dress. ride with me. tonight. now. bring the horn, and i will stay by



your side forever. think of it. me by your side, and the horn of valere in your hands. and that will only
be the beginning, i promise. what more could you ask for?
rand shook his head. i cant, selene. the horn . . . he looked around. a man looked out his window
across the way, then twitched the curtains closed; evening darkened the street, and there was no one else
in sight now except loial and hurin. the horn is not mine. i told you that. she turned her back on him,
her white cloak walling him off as effectively as bricks.

chapter 21

the nine rings

rand expected the common room to be empty, since it was nearly suppertime, but half a dozen men
crowded one table, dicing among their jacks of ale, and another sat by himself over a meal. though the
dicers carried no weapons in sight and wore no armor, only plain coats and breeches of dark blue,
something about the way they held themselves told rand they were soldiers. his eyes went to the solitary
man. an officer, with the tops of his high boots turned down, and his sword propped against the table
beside his chair. a single slash of red and one of yellow crossed the chest of the officers blue coat from
shoulder to shoulder, and the front of his head was shaved, though his black hair hung long in the back.
the soldiers hair was clipped short, as if it all had been cut under the same bowl. all seven turned to
look as rand and the others came in.
the innkeeper was a lean woman with a long nose and graying hair, but her wrinkles seemed part of her
ready smile more than anything else. she came bustling up, wiping her hands on a spotless white apron.
good even to you  her quick eyes took in rands goldembroidered red coat, and selenes fine
white dress  my lord, my lady. i am maglin madwen, my lord. be welcome to the nine rings.
and an ogier. not many of your kind come this way, friend ogier. would you be up from stedding
tsofu, then?
loial managed an awkward half bow under the weight of the chest. no, good innkeeper. i come the
other way, from the borderlands.
from the borderlands, you say. well. and you, my lord? forgive me for asking, but youve not the
look of the borderlands, if you dont mind my saying it.
im from the two rivers, mistress madwen, in andor. he glanced at selene  she did not seem to
admit he existed; her level look barely admitted that the room existed, or anyone in it. the lady selene
is from cairhien, from the capital, and i am from andor.



as you say, my lord. mistress madwens glance flickered to rands sword; the bronze herons were
plain on scabbard and hilt. she frowned slightly, but her face was clear again in a blink. youll be
wanting a meal for yourself and your beautiful lady, and your followers. and rooms, i expect. ill have
your horses seen to. ive a good table for you, right this way, and pork with yellow peppers on the fire.
would you be hunting the horn of valere, then, my lord, you and your lady?
in the act of following her, rand almost stumbled. no! why would you think we were?
no offense, my lord. weve had two through here already, all polished to look like heroes  not to
suggest anything of the kind about you, my lord  in the last month. not many strangers come here,
except traders up from the capital to buy oats and barley. id not suppose the hunt has left illian, yet, but
maybe some dont think they really need the blessing, and theyll get a jump on the others by missing it.
we are not hunting the horn, mistress. rand did not glance at the bundle in loials arms; the blanket
with its colorful stripes hung bunched over the ogiers thick arms and disguised the chest well. we
surely are not. we are on our way to the capital.
as you say, my lord. forgive me for asking, but is your lady well?
selene looked at her, and spoke for the first time. i am quite well. her voice left a chill in the air that
stifled talk for a moment.
youre not cairhienin, mistress madwen, hurin said suddenly. burdened down with their saddlebags
and rands bundle, he looked like a walking baggage cart. pardon, but you dont sound it.
mistress madwens eyebrows rose, and she shot a glance at rand, then grinned. i should have known
youd let your man speak freely, but ive grown used to   her glance darted toward the officer, who
had gone back to his own meal. light, no, im not cairhienin, but for my sins, i married one.
twentythree years i lived with him, and when he died on me  the light shine on him  i was all
ready to go back to lugard, but he had the last laugh, he did. he left me the inn, and his brother the
money, when i was sure it would be the other way round. tricksome and scheming, barin was, like
every man ive ever known, cairhienin most of all. will you be seated, my lord? my lady?
the innkeeper gave a surprised blink when hurin sat at table with them  an ogier, it seemed, was one
thing, but hurin was clearly a servant in her eyes. with another quick look at rand, she bustled off to the
kitchens, and soon serving girls came with their meal, giggling and staring at the lord and the lady, and the
ogier, till mistress madwen chased them back to their work.
at first, rand stared at his food doubtfully. the pork was cut in small bits, mixed with long strips of
yellow peppers, and peas, and a number of vegetables and things he did not recognize, all in some sort of
clear, thick sauce. it smelled sweet and sharp, both at the same time. selene only picked at hers, but
loial was eating with a will.
hurin grinned at rand over his fork. they spice their food oddly, cairhienin do, lord rand, but for all
that, its not bad.
it wont bite you, rand, loial added.
rand took a hesitant mouthful, and almost gasped. it tasted just as it smelled, sweet and sharp together,
the pork crisp on the outside and tender inside, a dozen different flavors, spices, all blending and
contrasting. it tasted like nothing he had ever put in his mouth before. it tasted wonderful. he cleaned his



plate, and when mistress madwen returned with the serving girls to clear away, he nearly asked for more
the way loial did. selenes was still half full, but she motioned curtly for one of the girls to take it.
a pleasure, friend ogier. the innkeeper smiled. it takes a lot to fill up one of you. catrine, bring
another helping, and be quick. one of the girls darted away. mistress madwen turned her smile on
rand. my lord, i had a man here who played the bittern, but he married a girl off one of the farms, and
she has him strumming reins behind a plow, now. i couldnt help noticing what looks like a flute case
sticking out of your mans bundle. since my musicians gone, would you let your man favor us with a little
music?
hurin looked embarrassed.
he doesnt play, rand explained. i do.
the woman blinked. it appeared lords did not play the flute, at least not in cairhien. i withdraw the
request, my lord. lights own truth, i meant no offense, i assure you. id never ask one such as yourself
to be playing in a common room.
rand hesitated only a moment. it had been too long since he had practiced the flute rather than the
sword, and the coins in his pouch would not last forever. once he was rid of his fancy clothes  once he
turned the horn over to ingtar and the dagger over to mat  he would need the flute to earn his supper
again while he searched for somewhere safe from aes sedai.and safe from myself? something did
happen back there. what?
i dont mind, he said. hurin, hand me the case. just slide it out. there was no need to show a
gleemans cloak; enough unspoken questions shone in mistress madwens dark eyes as it was.
worked gold chased with silver, the instrument looked the sort a lord might play, if lords anywhere
played the flute. the heron branded on his right palm did not interfere with his fingering. selenes salves
had worked so well he hardly thought of the brand unless he saw it. yet it was in his thoughts now, and
unconsciously he began to play heron on the wing.
hurin bobbed his head to the tune, and loial beat time on the table with a thick finger. selene looked at
rand as if wondering what he was im not a lord, my lady. im a shepherd, and i play the flute in
common rooms  but the soldiers turned from their talk to listen, and the officer closed the wooden
cover of the book he had begun reading. selenes steady gaze struck a stubborn spark inside rand.
determinedly he avoided any song that might fit in a palace, or a lords manor. he played only one
bucket of water and the old two rivers leaf, old jaks up a tree and goodman prikets
pipe.
with the last, the six soldiers began to sing in raucous tones, though not the words rand knew.

we rode down to river iralell
just to see the tairen come.
we stood along the riverbank
with the rising of the sun.
their horses blacked the summer plain,
their banners blacked the sky.
but we stood our ground on the banks of river iralell.
oh, we stood our ground.



yes, we stood our ground.
stood our ground along the river in the morning.

it was not the first time that rand had discovered a tune had different words and different names in
different lands, sometimes even in villages in the same land. he played along with them until they let the
words die away, slapping each others shoulders and making rude comments on one anothers singing.
when rand lowered the flute, the officer rose and made a sharp gesture. the soldiers fell silent in
midlaugh, scraped back their chairs to bow to the officer with hand on breast  and to rand  and
left without a backwards look.
the officer came to rands table and bowed, hand to heart; the shaven front of his head looked as if he
had dusted it with white powder. grace favor you, my lord. i trust they did not bother you, singing as
they did. they are a common sort, but they meant no insult, i assure you. i am aldrin caldevwin, my
lord. captain in his majestys service, the light illumine him. his eyes slid over rands sword; rand
had the feeling caldevwin had noticed the herons as soon as he came in.
they didnt insult me. the officers accent reminded him of moiraines, precise and every word
pronounced to its full.did she really let me go? i wonder if shes following me. or waiting for me .
sit down, captain. please. caldevwin drew a chair from another table. tell me, captain, if you dont
mind. have you seen any other strangers recently? a lady, short and slender, and a fighting man with blue
eyes. hes tall, and sometimes he wears his sword on his back.
i have seen no strangers at all, he said, lowering himself stiffly to his seat. saving yourself and your
lady, my lord. few of the nobility ever come here. his eyes flicked toward loial with a minute frown;
hurin he ignored for a servant.
it was only a thought.
under the light, my lord, i mean no disrespect, but may i hear your name? we have so few strangers
here that i find i wish to know every one.
rand gave it  he claimed no title, but the officer seemed not to notice  and said as he had to the
innkeeper, from the two rivers, in andor.
a wondrous place i have heard, lord rand  i may call you so?  and fine men, the andormen. no
cairhienin has ever worn a blademasters sword so young as you. i met some andormen, once, the
captaingeneral of the queens guards among them. i do not remember his name; an embarrassment.
perhaps you could favor me with it?
rand was conscious of the serving girls in the background, beginning to clean and sweep. caldevwin
seemed only to be making conversation, but there was a probing quality to his look. gareth bryne.
of course. young, to hold so much responsibility.
rand kept his voice level. gareth bryne has enough gray in his hair to be your father, captain.
forgive me, my lord rand. i meant to say that he came to it young. caldevwin turned to selene, and
for a moment he only stared. he shook himself, finally, as if coming out of a trance. forgive me for
looking at you so, my lady, and forgive me for speaking so, but grace has surely favored you. will you



give me a name to put to such beauty?
just as selene opened her mouth, one of the serving girls let out a cry and dropped a lamp she was
taking down from a shelf. oil splattered, and caught in a pool of flame on the floor. rand leaped to his
feet along with the others at the table, but before any of them could move, mistress madwen appeared,
and she and the girl smothered the flames with their aprons.
i have told you to be careful, catrine, the innkeeper said, shaking her nowsmutty apron under the
girls nose. youll be burning the inn down, and yourself in it.
the girl seemed on the point of tears. i was being careful, mistress, but i had such a twinge in my arm.
mistress madwen threw up her hands. you always have some excuse, and you still break more dishes
than all the rest. ah, its all right. clean it up, and dont burn yourself. the innkeeper turned to rand and
the others, all still standing around the table. i hope none of you take this amiss. the girl really wont
burn down the inn. shes hard on the dishes when she starts mooning over some young fellow, but shes
never mishandled a lamp before.
i would like to be shown to my room. i do not feel well after all. selene spoke in careful tones, as
though uncertain of her stomach, but despite that she looked and sounded as cool and calm as ever. the
journey, and the fire.
the innkeeper clucked like a mother hen. of course, my lady. i have a fine room for you and your
lord. shall i fetch mother caredwain? she has a fine hand with soothing herbs.
selenes voice sharpened. no. and i wish a room by myself.
mistress madwen glanced at rand, but the next moment she was bowing selene solicitously toward the
stairs. as you wish, my lady. lidan, fetch the ladys things like a good girl, now. one of the serving
girls ran to take selenes saddlebags from hurin, and the women disappeared upstairs, selene
stiffbacked and silent.
caldevwin stared after them until they were gone, then shook himself again. he waited until rand had
seated himself before taking his chair again. forgive me, my lord rand, for staring so at your lady, but
grace has surely favored you in her. i mean no insult.
none taken, rand said. he wondered if every man felt the way he did when they looked at selene.
as i was riding to the village, captain, i saw a huge sphere. crystal, it seemed. what is it?
the cairhienins eyes sharpened. it is part of the statue, my lord rand, he said slowly. his gaze
flickered toward loial; for an instant he seemed to be considering something new.
statue? i saw a hand, and a face, too. it must be huge.
it is, my lord rand. and old. caldevwin paused. from the age of legends, so i am told.
rand felt a chill. the age of legends, when use of the one power was everywhere, if the stories could
be believed.what happened there? i know there was something.
the age of legends, loial said. yes, it must be. no one has done work so vast since. a great piece
of work to dig that up, captain. hurin sat silently, as if he not only was not listening, but was not there at



all.
caldevwin nodded reluctantly. i have five hundred laborers in camp beyond the diggings, and even so it
will be past summers end before we have it clear. they are men from the foregate. half my work is to
keep them digging, and the other half to keep them out of this village. foregaters have a fondness for
drinking and carousing, you understand, and these people lead quiet lives. his tone said his sympathies
were all with the villagers.
rand nodded. he had no interest in foregaters, whoever they were. what will you do with it? the
captain hesitated, but rand only looked back at him until he spoke.
galldrian himself has ordered that it be taken to the capital.
loial blinked. a very great piece of work, that. i am not sure how something that big could be moved
so far.
his majesty has ordered it, caldevwin said sharply. it will be set up outside the city, a monument to
the greatness of cairhien and of house riatin. ogier are not the only ones who know how to move
stone. loial looked abashed, and the captain visibly calmed himself. your pardon, friend ogier. i
spoke in haste, and rudely. he still sounded a little gruff. will you be staying in tremonsien long, my
lord rand?
we leave in the morning, rand said. we are going to cairhien.
as it happens, i am sending some of my men back to the city tomorrow. i must rotate them; they grow
stale after too long watching men swing picks and shovels. you will not mind if they ride in your
company? he put it as a question, but as if acceptance were a foregone conclusion. mistress madwen
appeared on the stairs, and he rose. if you will excuse me, my lord rand, i must be up early. until the
morning, then. grace favor you. he bowed to rand, nodded to loial, and left.
as the doors closed behind the cairhienin, the innkeeper came to the table.
i have your lady settled, my lord. and ive good rooms prepared for you and your man, and you,
friend ogier. she paused, studying rand. forgive me if i overstep myself, my lord, but i think i can
speak freely to a lord who lets his man speak up. if im wrong . . . well, i mean no insult. for
twentythree years barin madwen and i were arguing when we werent kissing, so to speak. thats by
way of saying i have some experience. right now, youre thinking your lady never wants to see you
again, but its my way of thinking that if you tap on her door tonight, shell be taking you in. smile and say
it was your fault, whether it was or not.
rand cleared his throat and hoped his face was not turning red.light, egwene would kill me if she
knew id even thought of it. and selene would kill me if i did it. or would she? that did make his
cheeks burn. i . . . thank you for your suggestion, mistress madwen. the rooms . . . he avoided
looking at the blanketcovered chest by loials chair; they did not dare leave it without someone awake
and guarding it. we three will all sleep in the same room.
the innkeeper looked startled, but she recovered quickly. as you wish, my lord. this way, if you
please.
rand followed her up the stairs. loial carried the chest under its blanket  the stairs groaned under the
weight of him and the chest together, but the innkeeper seemed to think it was just an ogiers bulk 



and hurin still carried all the saddlebags and the bundled cloak with the harp and flute.
mistress madwen had a third bed brought in and hastily assembled and made up. one of the beds
already there stretched nearly from wall to wall in length, and had obviously been meant for loial from
the start. there was barely room to walk between the beds. as soon as the innkeeper was gone, rand
turned to the others. loial had pushed the stillcovered chest under his bed and was trying the mattress.
hurin was setting out the saddlebags.
do either of you know why that captain was so suspicious of us? he was, im sure of it. he shook his
head. i almost think he thought we might steal that statue, the way he was talking.
daes daemar, lord rand, hurin said. the great game. the game of houses, some call it. this
caldevwin thinks you must be doing something to your advantage or you wouldnt be here. and
whatever youre doing might be to his disadvantage, so he has to be careful.
rand shook his head. the great game? what game?
it isnt a game at all, rand, loial said from his bed. he had pulled a book from his pocket, but it lay
unopened on his chest. i dont know much about it  ogier dont do such things  but i have heard
of it. the nobles and the noble houses maneuver for advantage. they do things they think will help them,
or hurt an enemy, or both. usually, its all done in secrecy, or if not, they try to make it seem as if theyre
doing something other than what they are. he gave one tufted ear a puzzled scratch. even knowing
what it is, i dont understand it. elder haman always said it would take a greater mind than his to
understand the things humans do, and i dont know many as intelligent as elder haman. you humans are
odd.
hurin gave the ogier a slanted look, but he said, he has the right ofdaes daemar , lord rand.
cairhienin play it more than most, though all southerners do.
these soldiers in the morning, rand said. are they part of caldevwin playing this great game? we
cant afford to get mixed in anything like that. there was no need to mention the horn. they were all
too aware of its presence.
loial shook his head. i dont know, rand. hes human, so it could mean anything.
hurin?
i dont know, either. hurin sounded as worried as the ogier looked. he could be doing just what he
said, or . . . thats the way of the game of houses. you never know. i spent most of my time in cairhien
in the foregate, lord rand, and i dont know much about cairhienin nobles, but  well,daes daemar
can be dangerous anywhere, but especially in cairhien, ive heard. he brightened suddenly. the lady
selene, lord rand. shell know better than me or the builder. you can ask her in the morning.
but in the morning, selene was gone. when rand went down to the common room, mistress madwen
handed him a sealed parchment. if youll forgive me, my lord, you should have listened to me. you
should have tapped on your ladys door.
rand waited until she went away before he broke the white wax seal. the wax had been impressed with
a crescent moon and stars.
i must leave you for a time. there are too many people here, and i do not like caldevwin. i will await



you in cairhien. never think that i am too far from you. you will be in my thoughts always, as i know
that i am in yours
it was not signed, but that elegant, flowing script had the look of selene.
he folded it carefully and put it in his pocket before going outside, where hurin had the horses waiting.
captain caldevwin was there, too, with another, younger officer and fifty mounted soldiers crowding the
street. the two officers were bareheaded, but wore steelbacked gauntlets, and goldworked,
breastplates strapped over their blue coats. a short staff was fastened to the harness on each officers
back, bearing a small, stiff blue banner above his head. caldevwins banner bore a single white star,
while the younger mans was crossed by two white bars. they were a sharp contrast to the soldiers in
their plain armor and helmets that looked like bells with metal cut away to expose their faces.
caldevwin bowed as rand came out of the inn. good morning to you, my lord rand. this is elricain
tavolin, who will command your escort, if i may call it that. the other officer bowed; his head was
shaved as caldevwins was. he did not speak.
an escort will be welcome, captain, rand said, managing to sound at ease. fain would not try
anything against fifty soldiers, but rand wished he could be certain they were only an escort.
the captain eyed loial, on his way to his horse with the blanketcovered chest. a heavy burden,
ogier.
loial almost missed a step. i never like to be far from my books, captain. his wide mouth flashed
teeth in a selfconscious grin, and he hurried to strap the chest onto his saddle.
caldevwin looked around, frowning. your lady is not down yet. and her fine animal is not here.
she left already, rand told him. she had to go on to cairhien quickly, during the night.
caldevwins eyebrows lifted. during the night? but my men . . . forgive me, my lord rand. he drew
the younger officer aside, whispering furiously.
he had the inn watched, lord rand, hurin whispered. the lady selene must have gotten past them
unseen somehow.
rand climbed to reds saddle with a grimace. if there had been any chance caldevwin did not suspect
them of something, it seemed selene had finished it. too many people, she says, he muttered. therell
be more people by far in cairhien.
you said something, my lord?
rand looked up as tavolin joined him, mounted on a tall, dustcolored gelding. hurin was in his saddle,
too, and loial stood beside his big horses head. the soldiers were formed up in ranks. caldevwin was
nowhere to be seen.
nothing is happening the way i expect, rand said.
tavolin gave him a brief smile, hardly more than a twitch of his lips. shall we ride, my lord?



the strange procession headed for the hardpacked road that led to the city of cairhien.

chapter 22

watchers

nothing is happening as i expect, moiraine muttered, not expecting an answer from lan.
the long, polished table before her was littered with books and papers, scrolls and manuscripts, many of
them dusty from long storage and tattered with age, some only fragments. the room seemed almost
made of books and manuscripts, filling shelves except where there were doors or windows or the
fireplace. the chairs were highbacked and well padded, but half of them, and most of the small tables,
held books, and some had books and scrolls tucked under them. only the clutter in front of moiraine
was hers, though.
she rose and moved to the window, peered into the night toward the lights of the village, not far off. no
danger of pursuit here. no one would expect her to come here.clear my head, and begin again, she
thought. that is all there is to do.
none of the villagers had any suspicion that the two elderly sisters living in this snug house were aes
sedai. one did not suspect such things in a small place like tifans well, a farming community deep in the
grassy plains of arafel. the villagers came to the sisters for advice on their problems and cures for their
ills, and valued them as women blessed by the light, but no more. adeleas and vandene had gone into
voluntary retreat together so long ago that few even in the white tower remembered they still lived.
with the one equally aged warder who remained to them, they lived quietly, still intending to write the
history of the world since the breaking, and as much as they could include of before. one day. in the
meantime, there was so much information to gather, so many puzzles to solve. their house was the
perfect place for moiraine to find the information she needed. except that it was not there.
movement caught her eye, and she turned. lan was lounging against the yellow brick fireplace, as
imperturbable as a boulder. do you remember the first time we met, lan?
she was watching for some sign, or she would not have seen the quick twitch of his eyebrow. it was not
often she caught him by surprise. this was a subject neither of them ever mentioned; nearly twenty years
ago she had told him  with all the stiff pride of one still young enough to be called young, she recalled
 that she would never speak of it again and expected the same silence of him.
i remember, was all he said.



and still no apology, i suppose? you threw me into a pond. she did not smile, though she could feel
amusement at it, now. every stitch i had was soaked, and in what you bordermen call new spring. i
nearly froze.
i recall i built a fire, too, and hung blankets so you could warm yourself in privacy. he poked at the
burning logs and returned the firetool to its hook. even summer nights were cool in the borderlands. i
also recall that while i slept that night, you dumped half the pond on me. it would have saved a great deal
of shivering on both our parts if you had simply told me you were aes sedai rather than demonstrating it.
rather than trying to separate me from my sword. not a good way to introduce yourself to a
borderman, even for a young woman.
iwas young, and alone, and you were as large then as you are now, and your fierceness more open. i
did not want you to know i was aes sedai. it seemed to me at the time you might answer my questions
more freely if you did not know. she fell silent for a moment, thinking of the years since that meeting. it
had been good to find a companion to join her in her quest. in the weeks that followed, did you suspect
that i would ask you to bond to me? i decided you were the one in the first day.
i never guessed, he said dryly. i was too busy wondering if i could escort you to chachin and keep a
whole skin. a different surprise you had for me every night. the ants i recall in particular. i dont think i
had one good nights sleep that whole ride.
she permitted herself a small smile, remembering. i was young, she repeated. and does your bond
chafe after all these years? you are not a man to wear a leash easily, even so light a one as mine. it was
a stinging comment; she meant it to be so.
no. his voice was cool, but he took up the firetool again and gave the blaze a fierce poking it did not
need. sparks cascaded up the chimney. i chose freely, knowing what it entailed. the iron rod clattered
back onto its hook, and he made a formal bow. honor to serve, moiraine aes sedai. it has been and
will be so, always.
moiraine sniffed. your humility, lan gaidin, has always been more arrogance than most kings could
manage with their armies at their backs. from the first day i met you, it has been so.
why all this talk of days past, moiraine?
for the hundredth time  or so it seemed to her  she considered the words to use. before we left
tar valon i made arrangements, should anything happen to me, for your bond to pass to another. he
stared at her, silent. when you feel my death, you will find yourself compelled to seek her out
immediately. i do not want you to be surprised by it.
compelled, he breathed softly, angrily. never once have you used my bond to compel me. i thought
you more than disapproved of that.
had i left this thing undone, you would be free of the bond at my death, and not even my strongest
command to you would hold. i will not allow you to die in a useless attempt to avenge me. and i will not
allow you to return to your equally useless private war in the blight. the war we fight is the same war, if
you could only see it so, and i will see that you fight it to some purpose. neither vengeance nor an
unburied death in the blight will do.
and do you foresee your death coming soon? his voice was quiet, his face expressionless, both like



stone in a dead winter blizzard. it was a manner she had seen in him many times, usually when he was on
the point of violence. have you planned something, without me, that will see you dead?
i am suddenly glad there is no pond in this room, she murmured, then raised her hands when he
stiffened, offended at her light tone. i see my death in every day, as you do. how could i not, with the
task we have followed these years? now, with everything coming to a head, i must see it as even more
possible.
for a moment he studied his hands, large and square. i had never thought, he said slowly, that i might
not be the first of us to die. somehow, even at the worst, it always seemed . . . abruptly he scrubbed
his hands against each other. if there is a chance i might be given like a pet lapdog, i would at least like
to know to whom i am being given.
i have never seen you as a pet, moiraine said sharply, and neither does myrelle.
myrelle. he grimaced. yes, she would have to be green, or else some slip of a girl just raised to full
sisterhood.
if myrelle can keep her three gaidin in line, perhaps she has a chance to manage you. though she
would like to keep you, i know, she has promised to pass your bond to another when she finds one who
suits you better.
so. not a pet but a parcel. myrelle is to be a  a caretaker! moiraine, not even the greens treat their
warders so. no aes sedai has passed her warders bond to another in four hundred years, but you
intend to do it to me not once, but twice!
it is done, and i will not undo it.
the light blind me, if i am to be passed from hand to hand, do you at least have some idea in whose
hand i will end?
what i do is for your own good, and perhaps it may be for anothers, as well. it may be that myrelle
will find a slip of a girl just raised to sisterhood  was that not what you said?  who needs a warder
hardened in battle and wise in the ways of the world, a slip of a girl who may need someone who will
throw her into a pond. you have much to offer, lan, and to see it wasted in an unmarked grave, or left to
the ravens, when it could go to a woman who needs it would be worse than the sin of which the
whitecloaks prate. yes, i think she will have need of you.
lans eyes widened slightly; for him it was the same as another man gasping in shocked surmise. she
had seldom seen him so off balance. he opened his mouth twice before he spoke. and who do you
have in mind for this  
she cut him off. are you sure the bond does not chafe, lan gaidin? do you realize for the first time,
only now, the strength of that bond, the depth of it? you could end with some budding white, all logic
and no heart, or with a young brown who sees you as nothing more than a pair of hands to carry her
books and sketches. i can hand you where i will, like a parcel  or a lapdog  and you can do no
more than go. are you sure it does not chafe?
is that what this has been for? he grated. his eyes burned like blue fire, and his mouth twisted. anger;
for the first time ever that she had seen, open anger etched his face. has all this talk been a test  a
test!  to see if you could make my bond rub? after all this time? from the day i pledged to you, i have



ridden where you said ride, even when i thought it foolish, even when i had reason to ride another way.
never did you need my bond to force me. on your word i have watched you walk into danger and kept
my hands at my sides when i wanted nothing more than to out sword and carve a path to safety for you.
after this, you test me?
not a test, lan. i spoke plainly, not twisting, and i have done as i said. but at fal dara, i began to
wonder if you were still wholly with me. a wariness entered his eyes.lan, forgive me. i would not
have cracked the walls you hold so hard, but i must know . why did you do as you did with rand?
he blinked; it was obviously not what he expected. she knew what he had thought was coming, and she
would not let up now that he was off balance. you brought him to the amyrlin speaking and acting as a
border lord and a soldier born. it fit, in a way, with what i planned for him, but you and i never spoke of
teaching him any of that. why, lan?
it seemed . . . right. a young wolfhound must meet his first wolf someday, but if the wolf sees him as a
puppy, if he acts the puppy, the wolf will surely kill him. the wolfhound must be a wolfhound in the
wolfs eyes even more than in his own, if he is to survive.
is that how you see aes sedai? the amyrlin? me? wolves out to pull down your young wolfhound?
lan shook his head. you know what he is, lan. you know what he must become. must. what i have
worked for since the day you and i met, and before. do you now doubt what i do?
no. no, but . . . he was recovering himself, building his walls again. but they were not rebuilt yet.
how many times have you said thattaveren pull those around them like twigs in a whirlpool? perhaps i
was pulled, too. i only know that it felt right. those farm folk needed someone on their side. rand did, at
least. moiraine, i believe in what you do, even as now, when i know not half of it; believe as i believe in
you. i have not asked to be released from my bond, nor will i. whatever your plans for dying and seeing
me safely  disposed of  i will take great pleasure in keeping you alive and seeing those plans, at
least, go for nothing.
taveren, moiraine sighed. perhaps it was that. rather than guiding a chip floating down a stream, i
am trying to guide a log through rapids. every time i push at it, it pushes at me, and the log grows larger
the farther we go. yet i must see it through to the end. she gave a little laugh. i will not be unhappy, my
old friend, if you manage to put those plans awry. now, please leave me. i need to be alone to think.
he hesitated only a moment before turning for the door. at the last moment, though, she could not let him
go without one more question. do you ever dream of something different, lan?
all men dream. but i know dreams for dreams. this  he touched his sword hilt  is reality. the
walls were back, as high and hard as ever.
for a time after he left, moiraine leaned back in her chair, looking into the fire. she thought of nynaeve
and cracks in a wall. without trying, without thinking what she was doing, that young woman had put
cracks in lans walls and seeded the cracks with creepers. lan thought he was secure, imprisoned in his
fortress by fate and his own wishes, but slowly, patiently, the creepers were tearing down the walls to
bare the man within. already he was sharing some of nynaeves loyalties; in the beginning he had been
indifferent to the emonds field folk, except as people in whom moiraine had some interest. nynaeve
had changed that as she had changed lan.
to her surprise, moiraine felt a flash of jealousy. she had never felt that before, certainly not for any of
the women who had thrown their hearts at his feet, or those who had shared his bed. indeed, she had
never thought of him as an object of jealousy, had never thought so of any man. she was married to her
battle, as he was married to his. but they had been companions in those battles for so long. he had



ridden a horse to death, then run himself nearly to death, carrying her in his arms at the last, to anaiya for
healing. she had tended his wounds more than once, keeping with her arts a life he had been ready to
throw away to save hers. he had always said he was wedded with death. now a new bride had
captured his eyes, though he was blind to it. he thought he still stood strong behind his walls, but
nynaeve had laced bridal flowers in his hair. would he still find himself able to court death so blithely?
moiraine wondered when he would ask her to release him from his bond. and what she would do when
he did.
with a grimace, she got to her feet. there were more important matters. far more important. her eyes
ran over the open books and papers crowding the room. so many hints, but no answers.
vandene came in with a teapot and cups on a tray. she was slender and graceful, with a straight back,
and the hair gathered neatly at the nape of her neck was almost white. the agelessness of her smooth
face was that of long, long years. i would have had jaem bring this, and not disturb you myself, but hes
out in the barn practicing with his sword. she made a clucking sound as she pushed a battered
manuscript aside to set the tray on the table. lan being here has him remembering hes more than a
gardener and handyman. gaidin are so stiffnecked. i thought lan would still be here; thats why i
brought an extra cup. have you found what you were seeking?
i am not even sure what it is i am seeking. moiraine frowned, studying the other woman. vandene
was of the green ajah, not brown like her sister, yet the two of them had studied so long together that
she knew as much of history as adeleas.
whatever it is, you dont even seem to know where to look. vandene shifted some of the books and
manuscripts on the table, shaking her head. so many subjects. the trolloc wars. the watchers over
the waves. the legend of the return. two treatises on the horn of valere. three on dark prophecy, and
 light, heres santhras book on the forsaken. nasty, that. as nasty as this on shadar logoth. and
the prophecies of the dragon, in three translationsand the original. moiraine, whateverare you after? the
prophecies, i can understand  we hear some news here, remote as we are. we hear some of whats
happening in illian. theres even a rumor in the village that someone has already found the horn. she
gestured with a manuscript on the horn, and coughed in the dust that rose from it. i discount that, of
course. there would be rumors. but what  ? no. you said you wanted privacy, and ill give it to you.
stop a moment, moiraine said, halting the other aes sedai short of the door. perhaps you can
answer some questions for me.
i will try. vandene smiled suddenly. adeleas claims i should have chosen brown. ask. she poured
two cups of tea and handed one to moiraine, then took a chair by the fire.
steam curled over the cups while moiraine chose her questions carefully.to find the answers, and not
reveal too much . the horn of valere is not mentioned in the prophecies, but is it linked to the dragon
anywhere?
no. except for the fact that the horn must be found before tarmon gaidon and that the dragon
reborn is supposed to fight the last battle, there is no link between them at all. the whitehaired
woman sipped her tea and waited.
does anything link the dragon with toman head?
vandene hesitated. yes, and no. this is a bone between adeleas and me. her voice took on a
lecturing tone, and for a time she did sound like a brown. there is a verse in the original that translates



literally as five ride forth, and four return. above the watchers shall he proclaim himself, bannered cross
the sky in fire . . . well, it goes on. the point is, the wordmavron . i say it should be translated not
simply as watchers, which isavron .mavron has more importance to it. i say it means the watchers
over the waves, though they call themselvesdo miere avron , of course, notmavron . adeleas tells
me i am quibbling. but i believe it means the dragon reborn will appear somewhere above toman
head, in arad doman, or saldaea. adeleas may think im foolish, but i listen to every scrap i hear
coming from saldaea these days. mazrim taim can channel, so i hear, and our sisters havent managed
to corner him yet. if the dragon is reborn, and the horn of valere found, then the last battle is coming
soon. we may never finish our history. she gave a shiver, then abruptly laughed. odd thing to worry
about. i suppose iam becoming more a brown. horrible thing to contemplate. ask your next question.
i do not think you need worry about taim, moiraine said absently. it was a link with toman head,
however small and tenuous. he will be dealt with as logain was. what of shadar logoth?
shadar logoth! vandene snorted. in brief, the city was destroyed by its own hate, every living thing
except mordeth, the councilor who began it all, using the tactics of the darkfriends against the
darkfriends, and he now lies trapped there waiting for a soul to steal. it is not safe to enter, and nothing
in the city is safe to touch. but every novice close to being accepted knows as much as that. in full, you
will have to stay here a month and listen to adeleas lecture  she has the true knowledge of it  but
even i can tell you theres nothing of the dragon in it. that place was dead a hundred years before
yurian stonebow rose from the ashes of the trolloc wars, and he lies closest to it in history of all the
false dragons.
moiraine raised a hand. i did not speak clearly, and i do not speak of the dragon, now, reborn or
false. can you think of any reason why a fade would take something that had come from shadar
logoth?
not if it knew the thing for what it was. the hate that killed shadar logoth was hate they thought to use
against the dark one; it would destroy shadowspawn as surely as it would those who walk in the light.
they rightly fear shadar logoth as much as we.
and what can you tell me of the forsaken?
you do leap from subject to subject. i can tell you little more than you learned as a novice. no one
knows much more of the nameless than that. do you expect me to ramble on with what we both learned
as girls?
for an instant, moiraine was silent. she did not want to say too much, but vandene and adeleas had
more knowledge their fingertips than existed anywhere else but the white tower, more complications
awaited her there than she cared to deal with now. she let the name slip between her lips as if it were
escaping. lanfear.
for once, the other woman sighed, i know not a whit more than i did as a novice. the daughter of
the night remains as much a mystery as if she truly had cloaked herself in darkness. she paused, peering
into her cup, and when she looked up, her eyes were sharp on moiraines face. lanfear was linked to
the dragon, to lews therin telamon. moiraine, do you have some clue as to where the dragon will be
reborn? or was reborn? has he come already?
if i did, moiraine replied levelly, would i be here, instead of in the white tower? the amyrlin knows
as much as i, that i swear. have you received a summons from her?



no, and i suppose we would. when the time comes that we must face the dragon reborn, the amyrlin
will need every sister, every accepted, every novice who can light a candle unguided. vandenes voice
lowered, musing. with such power as he will wield, we must overwhelm him before he has a chance to
use it against us, before he can go mad and destroy the world. yet first we must let him face the dark
one. she laughed mirthlessly at the look on moiraines face. i am not a red. ive studied the
prophecies enough to know we dare not gentle him first. if wecan gentle him. i know as well as you, as
well as any sister who cares to find out, that the seals holding the dark one in shayol ghul are
weakening. the illianers call the great hunt of the horn. false dragons abound. and two of them,
logain and now this fellow in saldaea, able to channel. when was the last time the reds found two men
channeling in less than a year? when did they last find one in five years? not in my lifetime, and i am a
good deal older than you. the signs are everywhere. tarmon gaidon is coming. the dark one will
break free. and the dragon will be reborn. her cup rattled as she set it down. i suppose that is why i
feared you might have seen some sign of him.
he will come, moiraine said smoothly, and we will do what must be done.
if i thought it would do any good, id pull adeleass nose out of her book and set off for the white
tower. but i find i am glad to be here where i am instead. perhaps we will have time to finish our
history.
i hope that you will, sister.
vandene rose to her feet. well, i have tasks to be about before bed. if you have no more questions, i
will leave you to your studies. but she paused and revealed that however long she had spent with
books, she was still of the green ajah. you should do something about lan, moiraine. the man is
rumbling inside worse than dragonmount. sooner or later, he will erupt. ive known enough men to see
when one is troubled with a woman. you two have been together a long time. perhaps he has finally
come to see you are a woman as well as aes sedai.
lan sees me as what i am, vandene. aes sedai. and still as a friend, i hope.
you blues. always so ready to save the world that you lose yourselves.
after the whitehaired aes sedai left, moiraine gathered her cloak and, muttering to herself, went into
the garden. there was something in what vandene had said that tugged at her mind, but she could not
remember what it was. an answer, or a hint to an answer, for a question she had not asked  but she
could not bring the question to mind, either.
the garden was small, like the house, but neat even in moonlight aided by the yellow glow from the
cottage windows, with sandy walks between careful beds of flowers. she settled her cloak loosely on her
shoulders against the soft coolness of the night.what was the answer, and what was the question?
sand crunched behind her, and she turned, thinking it was lan.
a shadow loomed dimly only a few paces from her, a shadow that appeared to be a tootall man
wrapped in his cloak. but the face caught the moon, gauntcheeked, pale, with black eyes too big above
a puckered, redlipped mouth. the cloak opened, unfolding into great wings like a bats.
knowing it was too late, she opened herself tosaidar , but the draghkar began to croon, and its soft
hum filled her, fragmenting her will.saidar slipped away. she felt only a vague sadness as she stepped
toward the creature; the deep crooning that drew her closer suppressed feeling. white, white hands 



like a mans hands, but tipped with claws  reached for her, and lips the color of blood curved in a
travesty of a smile, baring sharp teeth, but dimly, so dimly, she knew it would not bite or tear. fear the
draghkars kiss. once those lips touched her, she would be as good as dead, to be drained of soul, then
of life. whoever found her, even if they came as the draghkar let her fall, would find a corpse without a
mark and cold as if dead two days. and if they came before she was dead, what they found would be
worse, and not really her at all any longer. the croon pulled her within reach of those pale hands, and the
draghkars head bent slowly toward her.
she felt only the smallest surprise when a sword blade flashed over her shoulder to pierce the
draghkars breast, and little more when a second crossed her other shoulder to strike beside the first.
dazed, swaying, she watched as if from a great distance as the creature was pushed back, away from
her. lan came into her view, then jaem, the grayhaired warders bony arms holding his blade as straight
and true as the younger mans. the draghkars pale hands bloodied as they tore at the sharp steel, wings
buffeting the two men with thunderclaps. suddenly, wounded and bleeding, it began to croon again. to
the warders.
with an effort, moiraine gathered herself; she felt almost as drained as if the thing had managed its kiss.
no time to be weak . in an instant she opened herself tosaidar and, as the power filled her, steeled
herself to touch the shadowspawn directly. the two men were too close; anything else would harm them,
as well. even using the one power, she knew she would feel soiled by the draghkar.
but even as she began, lan cried out, embrace death! jaem echoed him firmly. embrace death!
and the two men stepped within reach of the draghkars touch, drove home their blades to the hilt.
throwing back its head, the draghkar bellowed, a shriek that seemed to pierce moiraines head with
needles. even wrapped insaidar she could feel it. like a tree falling, the draghkar toppled, one wing
knocking jaem to his knees. lan sagged as if exhausted.
lanterns hurried from the house, borne by vandene and adeleas.
what was that noise? adeleas demanded. she was almost a mirror image of her sister. has jaem
gone and . . . the lantern light fell on the draghkar; her voice trailed off.
vandene took moiraines hands. it did not . . . ? she left the question unfinished as, to moiraines
eyes, a nimbus surrounded her. feeling strength flowing into her from the other woman, moiraine wished,
not for the first time, that aes sedai could do as much for themselves as they could for others.
it did not, she said gratefully. see to the gaidin.
lan looked at her, mouth tight. if you had not made me so angry i had to go work forms with jaem, so
angry i gave it up to come back to the house . . .
but i did, she said. the pattern takes everything into the weaving. jaem was muttering, but still
allowing vandene to see to his shoulder. he was all bone and tendon, yet looked as hard as old roots.
how, adeleas demanded, could any creature of the shadow come so close without us sensing it?
it was warded, moiraine said.
impossible, adeleas snapped. only a sister could   she stopped, and vandene turned from jaem



to look at moiraine.
moiraine said the words none of them wanted to hear. the black ajah. shouts drifted from the
village. best you hide this  she gestured to the draghkar, sprawled across a flower bed  quickly.
they will be coming to ask if you need help, but seeing this will start talk you will not like.
yes, of course, adeleas said. jaem, go and meet them. tell them you dont know what made the
noise, but all is well here. slow them down. the grayhaired warder hurried into the night toward the
sound of approaching villagers. adeleas turned to study the draghkar as if it were a puzzling passage in
one of her books. whether aes sedai are involved or not, whatever could have brought it here?
vandene regarded moiraine silently.
i fear i must leave you, moiraine said. lan, will you ready the horses? as he left, she said, i will
leave letters with you to be sent on to the white tower, if you will arrange it. adeleas nodded absently,
her attention still on the thing on the ground.
and will you find your answers where you are going? vandene asked.
i may already have found one i did not know i sought. i only hope i am not too late. i will need pen
and parchment. she drew vandene toward the house, leaving adeleas to deal with the draghkar.

chapter 23

the testing

nynaeve warily eyed the huge chamber, far beneath the white tower, and eyed sheriam, at her side,
just as warily. the mistress of novices seemed expectant, perhaps even a little impatient. in her few
days in tar valon, nynaeve had seen only serenity in the aes sedai, and a smiling acceptance of events
coming in their own time.
the domed room had been carved out of the bedrock of the island; the light of lamps on tall stands
reflected from pale, smooth stone walls. centered under the dome was a thing made of three rounded,
silver arches, each just tall enough to walk under, sitting on a thick silver ring with their ends touching
each other. arches and ring were all of one piece. she could not see what lay inside; there the light
flickered oddly, and made her stomach flutter with it if she looked too long. where arch touched ring, an
aes sedai sat crosslegged on the bare stone of the floor, staring at the silvery construction. another
stood nearby, beside a plain table on which sat three large silver chalices. each, nynaeve knew  or at
least, she had been told  was filled with clear water. all four aes sedai wore their shawls, as sheriam
did; bluefringed for sheriam, red for the swarthy woman by the table, green, white, and gray for the



three around the arches. nynaeve still wore one of the dresses she had been given in fal dara, pale
green embroidered with small white flowers.
first you leave me to stare at my thumbs from morning to night, nynaeve muttered, and now its all in
a rush.
the hour waits on no woman, sheriam replied. the wheel weaves as the wheel wills, andwhen it
wills. patience is a virtue that must be learned, but we must all be ready for the change of an instant.
nynaeve tried not to glare. the most irritating thing she had yet discovered about the flamehaired aes
sedai was that she sometimes sounded as if she were quoting sayings even when she was not. what is
that thing?
aterangreal .
well, that tells me nothing. what does it do?
terangrealdo many things, child. likeangreal andsaangreal , they are remnants of the age of
legends that use the one power, though they are not quite so rare as the other two. while some
terangreal must be made to work by aes sedai, as this one must, others will do what they do simply
with the presence of any woman who can channel. there are even supposed to be some that will function
for anyone at all. unlikeangreal andsaangreal , they were made to do specific things. one other we
have in the tower makes oaths binding. when you are raised to full sisterhood, you will take your final
vows holding thatterangreal . to speak no word that is not true. to make no weapon for one man to
kill another. never to use the one power as a weapon except against darkfriends or shadowspawn, or
in the last extreme of defending your own life, that of your warder, or that of another sister.
nynaeve shook her head. it sounded either like too much to swear or too little, and she said so.
once, aes sedai were not required to swear oaths. it was known what aes sedai were and what they
stood for, and there was no need for more. many of us wish it were so still. but the wheel turns, and the
times change. that we swear these oaths, that we are known to be bound, allows the nations to deal with
us without fearing that we will throw up our own power, the one power, against them. between the
trolloc wars and the war of the hundred years we made these choices, and because of them the white
tower still stands, and we can still do what we can against the shadow. sheriam drew a deep breath.
light, child, i am trying to teach you what any other woman standing where you are would have learned
over the course of years. it cannot be done.terangreal are what must concern you, now. we dont
know why they were made. we dare use only a handful of them, and the ways in which we do dare to
use them may be nothing like the purposes the makers intended. most, we have learned to our cost to
avoid. over the years, no few aes sedai have been killed or had their talent burned out of them,
learning that.
nynaeve shivered. and you want me to walk into this one? the light inside the arches flickered less,
now, but she could see what lay in it no better.
we know what this one does. it will bring you facetoface with your greatest fears. sheriam smiled
pleasantly. no one will ask you what you have faced; you need tell no more than you wish. every
womans fears are her own property.
vaguely, nynaeve thought about her nervousness concerning spiders, especially in the dark, but she did
not think that was what sheriam meant. i just walk through one arch and out another? three times



through, and its done?
the aes sedai adjusted her shawl with an irritated hitch of her shoulder. if you wish to boil it down that
far, yes, she said dryly. i told you on the way here what you must know about the ceremony, as much
as anyone is allowed to know beforehand. if you were a novice come to this, you would know it by
heart, but dont worry about making mistakes. i will remind you, if necessary. are you sure you are
ready to face it? if you want to stop now, i can still write your name in the novice book.
no!
very well, then. two things i will tell you now that no woman hears until she is in this room. the first is
this. once you begin, you must continue to the end. refuse to go on, and no matter your potential, you
will be very kindly put out of the tower with enough silver to support you for a year, and you will never
be allowed back. nynaeve opened her mouth to say she would not refuse, but sheriam cut her off with
a sharp gesture. listen, and speak when you know what to say. second. to seek, to strive, is to know
danger. you will know danger here. some women have entered, and never come out. when the
terangreal was allowed to grow quiet, they  were  not  there. and they were never seen again.
if you will survive, you must be steadfast. falter, fail, and . . . her silence was more eloquent than any
words. this is your last chance, child. you may turn back now, right now, and i will put your name in
the novice book, and you will have only one mark against you. twice more you will be allowed to come
here, and only at the third refusal will you be put out of the tower. it is no shame to refuse. many do. i
myself could not do it, my first time here. now you may speak.
nynaeve gave the silver arches a sidelong look. the light in them no longer flickered; they were filled
with a soft, white glow. to learn what she wanted to learn, she needed the freedom of the accepted to
question, to study on her own, with no more guidance than she asked for.i must make moiraine pay for
what she has done to us. i must . i am ready.
sheriam started slowly into the chamber. nynaeve went beside her.
as if that were a signal, the red sister spoke in loud, formal tones. whom do you bring with you,
sister? the three aes sedai around theterangreal continued their attentions to it.
one who comes as a candidate for acceptance, sister, sheriam replied just as formally.
is she ready?
she is ready to leave behind what she was, and, passing through her fears, gain acceptance.
does she know her fears?
she has never faced them, but now is willing.
then let her face what she fears.
sheriam stopped, two spans from the arches, and nynaeve stopped with her. your dress, sheriam
whispered, not looking at her.
nynaeves cheeks colored at forgetting already what sheriam had told her on the way down from her
room. hastily she removed her clothes, her shoes and stockings. for a moment she could almost forget
the arches in folding her garments and putting them neatly to one side. she tucked lans ring carefully



under her dress; she did not want anyone staring at that. then she was done, and theterangreal was still
there, still waiting.
the stone felt cold under her bare feet, and she broke out all over in goose bumps, but she stood
straight and breathed slowly. she would not let any of them see she was afraid.
the first time, sheriam said, is for what was. the way back will come but once. be steadfast.
nynaeve hesitated. then she stepped forward, through the arch and into the glow. it surrounded her, as
if the air itself were shining, as if she were drowning in light. the light was everywhere. the light was
everything.
nynaeve gave a start when she realized she was naked, then stared in amazement. a stone wall stood to
either side of her, twice as tall as she was and smooth, as if carved. her toes wriggled on dusty, uneven
stone paving. the sky above seemed flat and leaden, for all the lack of clouds, and the sun hung
overhead swollen and red. in both directions were openings in the wall, gateways marked by short,
square columns. the walls narrowed her field of view, but the ground sloped down from where she
stood, both in front and behind. through the gateways she could see more thick walls, and passages
between. she was in a gigantic maze.
where it this? how did i come here?like a different voice, another thought came.the way out will
come but once.
she shook her head. if theres only one way out, ill not find it standing here. at least the air was
warm and dry. i hope i find some clothes before i find people, she muttered.
dimly, she remembered playing mazes on paper as a child; there had been a trick to finding your way
out, but she could not bring it to mind. everything in the past seemed vague, as if it had happened to
someone else. trailing a hand along the wall, she started out, dust rising in puffs beneath her bare feet.
at the first opening in the wall, she found herself peering down another passage that seemed
indistinguishable from the one she was in already. taking a deep breath, she went on straight, through
more passages that all looked exactly alike. presently she came to something different. the way forked.
she took the left turning, and eventually it forked again. once more she went left. at the third fork, left
brought her to a blank wall.
grimly she walked back to the last fork and went right. this time it took four turnings right to bring her
to a dead end. for a moment, she stood glaring at it. how did i get here? she demanded loudly.
where is this place?the way out will come but once.
once more she turned back. she was sure there had to be a trick to the maze. at the last fork, she went
left, then right at the next. determined, she kept on. left, then right. straight until she came to a fork.
left, then right.
it seemed to her to be working. at least, she had gone past a dozen forkings this time without finding an
end. she came to another.
out of the corner of her eye, she caught a flicker of motion. when she turned to look, there was only the
dusty passage between smooth stone walls. she started to take the left fork . . . and spun around at
another glimpse of movement. there was nothing there, but this time she was sure. there had been
someone behind her. was someone. she broke into a nervous trot in the opposite direction.



again and again, now, just at the edge of vision down this side passage or that, she saw something
move, too quick to make out, gone before she could turn her head to see it plainly. she broke into a run.
few boys had been able to outrun her when she was a girl in the two rivers.the two rivers? what is
that?
a man stepped out from an opening ahead of her. his dark clothes had a musty, halfrotted look, and he
was old. older than old. skin like crazed parchment covered his skull too tightly, as if there were no flesh
beneath. wispy tufts of brittle hair covered a scabbed scalp, and his eyes were so sunken they seemed to
peer out of two caves.
she skidded to a stop, the uneven paving stones rough under her feet.
i am aginor, he said, smiling, and i have come for you.
her heart tried to leap out of her chest. one of the forsaken. no. no, it cannot be!
you are a pretty one, girl. i will enjoy you.
suddenly nynaeve remembered she wore not a stitch. with a yelp and a face red only partly from
anger, she darted away down the nearest crossing passage. cackling laughter pursued her, and the sound
of a shuffling run that seemed to match her best speed, and breathy promises of what he would do when
he caught her, promises that curdled her stomach even only half heard.
desperately she searched for a way out, peering frantically as she ran with fists clenched.the way out
will come but once. be steadfast . there was nothing, only more of the endless maze. as hard as she
could run, his filthy words came always right behind her. slowly, fear turned completely to anger.
burn him! she sobbed. the light burn him! he has no right! within her she felt a flowering, an
opening up, an unfolding to light.
teeth bared, she turned to face her pursuer just as aginor appeared, laughing, in a lurching gallop.
you have no right! she flung her fist toward him, fingers opening as if she were throwing something.
she was only half surprised to see a ball of fire leave her hand.
it exploded against aginors chest, knocking him to the ground. for only an instant he sprawled there,
then rose, staggering. he seemed unaware of the smoldering front of his coat. you dare? you dare! he
quivered, and spittle leaked down his chin.
abruptly there were clouds in the sky, threatening billows of gray and black. lightning leaped from the
cloud, straight for nynaeves heart.
it seemed to her, just for a heartbeat, as if time had suddenly slowed, as though that heartbeat took
forever. she felt the flow inside her saidar , came a distant thought  felt the answering flow in the
lightning. and she altered the direction of the flow. time leaped forward.
with a crash, the bolt shattered stone above aginors head. the forsakens sunken eyes widened, and
he tottered back. you cannot! it cannot be! he leaped away as lightning struck where he had stood,
stone erupting in a fountain of shards.



grimly nynaeve started toward him. and aginor fled.
saidarwas a torrent racing through her. she could feel the rocks around her, and the air, feel the tiny,
flowing bits of the one power that suffused them, and made them. and she could feel aginor doing . . .
something, as well. dimly she felt it, and far distant, as if it were something she could never truly know,
but around her she saw the effects and knew them for what they were.
the ground rumbled and heaved under her feet. walls toppled in front of her, piles of stone to block her
way. she scrambled over them, uncaring if sharp rock cut hands and feet, always keeping aginor in sight.
a wind rose, howling down the passages against her, raging till it flattened her cheeks and made her eyes
water, trying to knock her down; she changed the flow, and aginor tumbled along the passageway like
an uprooted bush. she touched the flow in the ground, redirected it, and stone walls collapsed around
aginor, sealing him in. lightning fell with her glare, striking around him, stone exploding ever closer and
closer. she could feel him fighting to push it back at her, but foot by foot the dazzling bolts moved toward
the forsaken.
something gleamed off to her right, something uncovered by the collapsing walls.
nynaeve could feel aginor weakening, feel his efforts to strike at her grow more feeble and more frantic.
yet somehow she knew he had not given up. if she let him go now, he would chase after her as strongly
as before, convinced she was too weak to defeat him after all, too weak to stop him from doing with her
as he wished.
a silver arch stood where stone had been, an arch filled with soft silver radiance.the way back . . .
she knew when the forsaken abandoned his attack, the moment when all his efforts were given over to
staving her off. and his power was not enough, he could no longer deflect her blows. now he had to
fling himself away from the leaping gouts of stone thrown up by her lightning, the explosions flinging him
down again.
the way back will come but once. be steadfast.
the lightning no longer fell. nynaeve turned from the scrabbling aginor to look at the arch. she looked
back at aginor, just in time to see him crawl out of sight over the mounded stone and disappear. she
hissed in frustration. much of the maze still stood, and a hundred new places to hide in the rubble she and
the forsaken had made. it would take time to find him again, but she was sure if she did not find him first,
he would find her. in his full strength, he would come on her when she least expected him.
the way back will come but once.
frightened, she looked again and was relieved to see the arch still there. if she could find aginor quickly
...
be steadfast.
with a cry of thwarted anger, she climbed over the tumbled stone toward the arch. whoevers
responsible for me being here, she muttered, ill make them wish they had gotten what aginor got. ill
  she stepped into the arch, and the light overwhelmed her.
ill   nynaeve stepped out of the arch and stopped to stare. it was all as she remembered  the
silverterangreal , the aes sedai, the chamber  but remembering was like a blow, absent memories



crashing back into her head. she had come out of the same arch by which she went in.
the red sister raised one of the silver chalices high and poured a stream of cool, clear water over
nynaeves head. you are washed clean of what sin you may have done, the aes sedai intoned, and
of those done against you. you are washed clean of what crime you may have committed, and of those
committed against you. you come to us washed clean and pure, in heart and soul.
nynaeve shivered as the water ran down her body, dripping on the floor.
sheriam took her arm with a relieved smile, but the mistress of novices voice gave no hint of past
worry. you do well so far. coming back is doing well. remember what your purpose is, and you will
continue to be well. the redhead began to lead her around theterangreal to another arch.
it was so real, nynaeve said in a whisper. she could remember everything, remember channeling the
one power as easily as lifting her hand. she could remember aginor, and the things the forsaken wanted
to do to her. she shivered again. was it real?
no one knows, sheriam replied. it seems real in memory, and some have come out bearing the
actual wounds of hurts taken inside. others have been cut to the bone inside, and come back without a
mark. it is all of it different every time for every woman who goes in. the ancients said there were many
worlds. perhaps thisterangreal takes you to them. yet if so, it does so under very stringent rules for
something meant just to take you from one place to another. i believe it is not real. but remember,
whether what happens is real or not, thedanger is as real as a knife plunging into your heart.
i channeled the power. it was so easy.
sheriam missed a step. that isnt supposed to be possible. you should not even remember being able
to channel. she studied nynaeve. and yet you are not harmed. i can still sense the ability in you, as
strong as it ever was.
you sound as if it were dangerous, nynaeve said slowly, and sheriam hesitated before answering.
it isnt thought necessary to give a warning, since you shouldnt be able to remember it, but . . . this
terangreal was found during the trolloc wars. we have the records of its examination in the archives.
the first sister to enter was warded as strongly as she could be, since no one knew what it would do.
she kept her memories, and she channeled the one power when she was threatened. and she came out
with her abilities burned to nothing, unable to channel, unable even to sense the true source. the second
to go in was also warded, and she, too, was destroyed in the same way. the third went unprotected,
remembered nothing once she was inside, and returned unharmed. that is one reason why we send you
completely unprotected. nynaeve, you must not channel inside theterangreal again. i know it is hard to
remember anything, but try.
nynaeve swallowed. she could remember everything, could remember not remembering. i wont
channel, she said.if i can remember not to . she wanted to laugh hysterically.
they had reached the next arch. the glow still filled them all. sheriam gave nynaeve a last warning look,
and left her standing alone.
the second time is for what is. the way back will come but once. be steadfast.
nynaeve stared at the shining silver arch.what is in there this time? the others were waiting, watching.



she stepped firmly through into the light.
nynaeve stared down at the plain brown dress she wore with surprise, then gave a start. why was she
staring at her own dress?the way back will come but once.
looking around her, she smiled. she stood on the edge of the green in emonds field, with
thatchroofed houses all around, and the winespring inn right in front of her. the winespring itself rose in
a gush from the stone outcrop thrusting up through the grass of the green, and the winespring water
rushed off east under the willows beside the inn. the streets were empty, but most people would be at
their chores this time of the morning.
looking at the inn, her smile faded. there was more than an air of neglect about it, whitewash faded, a
shutter hanging loose, the rotted end of a rafter showing at a gap in the roof tiles.whats gotten into
bran? is he spending so much time being mayor hes forgetting to take care of his inn?
the inn door swung open, and cenn buie came out, stopping dead when he saw her. the old thatcher
was as gnarled as an oak root, and the look he gave her was just as friendly. so youve come back,
have you? well, you might as well be off again.
she frowned as he spat at her feet and hurried on past her; cenn was never a pleasant man, but he was
seldom openly rude. never to her, at least. never to her face. following him with her eye, she saw signs
of neglect all through the village, thatch that should have been mended, weeds filling yards. the door on
mistress alcaars house hung aslant on a broken hinge.
shaking her head, nynaeve pushed into the inn.ill have more than one word with bran about this.
the common room was empty except for a lone woman, her thick, graying braid pulled over her
shoulder. she was wiping a table, but from the way she stared at the tabletop, nynaeve did not think she
was aware of what she doing. the room seemed dusty.
marin?
marin alvere jumped, one hand clutching her throat, and stared. she looked years older than nynaeve
remembered. worn. nynaeve? nynaeve! oh, it is you. egwene? have you brought egwene back? say
you have.
i . . . nynaeve put a hand to her head.where is egwene? it seemed sheshould be able to remember.
no. no, i havent brought her back.the way back will come but once.
mistress alvere sagged into one of the straightbacked chairs. i was so hoping. ever since bran died .
. .
bran is dead? nynaeve could not imagine it; that broad, smiling man had always seemed as if he
would go on forever. i should have been here.
the other woman jumped to her feet and hurried to peer anxiously through a window at the green and
the village. if malena knows youre here, there will be trouble. i just know cenn went scurrying off to
find her. hes the mayor, now.
cenn? how did even those woolheaded men choose cenn?



it was malena. she had the whole womens circle after their husbands for him. marin pressed her
face almost against the window, trying to look every way at once. silly men dont talk about whose
name theyre putting in the box beforehand; i suppose every man who voted for cenn thought he was the
only one whose wife had badgered him into it. thought one vote would make no difference. well, they
learned better. we all did.
who is this malena who has the womens circle doing her bidding? ive never heard of her.
shes from watch hill. shes the wis . . .  marin turn from the window wringing her hands. malena
aylars the wisdom, nynaeve. when you didnt come back . . . light, i hope she doesnt find out
youre here.
nynaeve shook her head in wonder. marin, youre afraid of her. you are shaking. what kind of
woman is she? why did the womens circle ever choose someone like her?
mistress alvere gave a bitter laugh. we must have been mad. malena came down to see mavra
mallen the day before mavra had to go back to deven ride, and that night some children took sick, and
malena stayed to look after them, and then the sheep started dying, and malena took care of that, too. it
just seemed natural to choose her, but . . . shes a bully, nynaeve. she browbeats you into doing what
she wants. she keeps at you, and keeps at you, until youre too tired to say no anymore. and worse.
she knocked alsbet luhhan down.
a picture flashed in nynaeves head of alsbet luhhan and her husband, haral, the blacksmith. she was
nearly as tall as him, and stoutly built, though handsome. alsbets almost as strong as haral. i cant
believe . . .
malenas not a big woman, but shes  shes fierce, nynaeve. she beat alsbet all around the green
with a stick, and none of us who saw had the nerve to try to stop it. when they found out, bran and
haral said she had to go, even if they were interfering in womens circle business. i think some of the
circle might have listened, but bran and haral both took sick the same night, and died within a day of
each other. marin bit her lip and looked around the room as if she thought someone might be hiding
there. her voice lowered. malena mixed medicine for them. she said it was her duty even if they had
spoken against her. i saw . . . i saw gray fennel in what she took away with her.
nynaeve gasped. but . . . are you sure, marin? are you certain? the other woman nodded, her face
wrinkling on the point of tears. marin, if you even suspected this woman might have poisoned bran, how
could you not go to the circle?
she said bran and haral didnt walk in the light, marin mumbled, talking against the wisdom the
way they did. she said that was why they died; the light abandoned them. she talks about sin all the
time. she said paet alcaar sinned, talking against her after bran and haral died. all he said was she
didnt have the way with healing you did, but she drew the dragons fang on his door, right out where
everyone could see her with the charcoal in her hand. both his boys were dead before the week was out
 just dead when their mother went to wake them. poor nela. we found her wandering, laughing and
crying all at the same time, screaming that paet was the dark one, and hed killed her boys. paet hung
himself the next day. she shuddered, and her voice went so soft nynaeve could barely hear it. i have
four daughters still living under my roof. living, nynaeve. do you understand what im saying. theyre
still alive, and i want to keep them alive.
nynaeve felt cold to her bones. marin, you cant allow this.the way back will come but once. be
steadfast . she pushed it away. if the womens circle stands together, you can be rid of her.



stand together against malena? marins laugh was nearer a sob. were all afraid of her. but shes
good with the children. there are always children sick these days, it seems, but malena does the best she
can. almost no one ever died of sickness when you were wisdom.
marin, listen to me. dont you see why there are always children sick? if she cant make you afraid of
her, she makes you think you need her for the children. shes doing it, marin. just as she did it to bran.
she couldnt, marin breathed. she, wouldnt. not the little ones.
she is, marin.the way back  nynaeve suppressed the thought ruthlessly. is there anyone in the
circle who isnt afraid? anyone who will listen?
the other woman said, no one who isnt afraid. but corin ayellin might listen. if she does, she might
bring two or three more. nynaeve, if enough of the circle listens, will you be our wisdom again? i think
you may be the only one who wont back down to malena, even if we all know. you dont know what
shes like.
i will.the way back no! these are my people! get your cloak, and well go to corin.
marin was hesitant about leaving the inn, and once nynaeve had her outside she slunk along from
doorstep to doorstep, crouching and watching.
before they were halfway to corin ayellins house, nynaeve saw a tall, scrawny woman striding down
the other side of the green toward the inn, slashing the heads off weeds with a thick willow switch. bony
as she was, she had a look of wiry strength, and a set, determined slash of a mouth. cenn buie scuttled
along in her wake.
malena. marin pulled nynaeve into the space between two houses, and whispered as if afraid the
woman might hear across the green. i knew cenn would go to her.
something made nynaeve look over her shoulder. behind her stood a silver arch, reaching from house
to house, glowing whitely.the way back will come but once. be steadfast.
marin gave a soft scream. shes seen us. light help us, shes coming this way!
the tall woman had turned across the green, leaving cenn standing uncertainly. there was no
uncertainty on malenas face. she walked slowly, as if there were no hope of escape, a cruel smile
growing with every step.
marin tugged at nynaeves sleeve. we have to run. we have to hide. nynaeve, come on. cenn will
have told her who you are. she hates anyone even to speak of you.
the silver arch pulled nynaeves eyes.the way back . . . she shook her head, trying to remember.it is
not real . she looked at marin; stark terror twisted the womans face.you must be steadfast to
survive.
please, nynaeve. shes seen me with you. she  has  seen  me! please, nynaeve! 
malena came closer, implacable.my people . the arch shone.the way back. it is not real.



with a sob, nynaeve tore her arm out of marins grasp and plunged toward the silvery glow.
marins shriek hounded her. for the love of the light, nynaeve, help me! help me!
the glow enveloped her.
staring, nynaeve staggered out of the arch, barely aware of the chamber or the aes sedai. marins last
cry still rang in her ears. she did not flinch when cold water was suddenly poured over her head.
you are washed clean of false pride. you are washed clean of false ambition. you come to us washed
clean, in heart and soul. as the red aes sedai stepped back, sheriam came to take nynaeves arm.
nynaeve gave a start, then realized who it was. she seized the collar of sheriams dress in both hands.
tell me it was not real. tell me!
bad? sheriam pried her hands loose as if she were used to this reaction. it is always worse, and the
third is the worst of all.
i left my friend . . . i left mypeople . . . in the pit of doom to come back.please, light, it was not
real. i didnt really . . .i haveto make moiraine pay. i haveto!
there is always some reason not to return, something to prevent you, or distract you. thisterangreal
weaves traps for you from your own mind, weaves them tight and strong, harder than steel and more
deadly than poison. that is why we use it as a test. you must want to be aes sedai more than anything
else in the whole world, enough to face anything, fight free of anything, to achieve it. the white tower
cannot accept less. we demand it of you.
you demand a great deal. nynaeve stared at the third arch as the red haired aes sedai took her
toward it.the third is the worst . im afraid, she whispered.what could be worse than what i just
did?
good, sheriam said. you seek to be aes sedai, to channel the one power. no one should
approach that without fear and awe. fear will keep you cautious; caution will keep you alive. she turned
nynaeve to face the arch, but she did not step back immediately. no one will force you to enter a third
time, child.
nynaeve licked her lips. if i refuse, youll put me out of the tower and never let me come back.
sheriam nodded. and this is the worst. sheriam nodded again. nynaeve drew breath. i am ready.
the third time, sheriam intoned formally, is for what will be. the way back will come but once. be
steadfast.
nynaeve threw herself at the arch in a run.
laughing, she ran through swirling clouds of butterflies rising from wildflowers that covered the hilltop
meadow with a kneedeep blanket of color. her gray mare danced nervously, reins dangling, at the edge
of the meadow, and nynaeve stopped running so as not to frighten the animal more. some of the
butterflies settled on her dress, on flowers of embroidery and seed pearls, or flittered around the
sapphires and moonstones in her hair, hanging loose about her shoulders.
below the hill, the necklace of the thousand lakes spread through the city of malkier, reflecting the



cloudbrushing seven towers, with golden crane banners flying at their heights in the mists. the city had
a thousand gardens, but she preferred this wild garden on the hilltop.the way back will come but once.
be steadfast.
the sound of hooves made her turn.
allan mandragoran, king of malkier, leaped from the back of his charger and strolled toward her
through the butterflies, laughing. his face had the look of a hard man, but the smiles he wore for her
softened the stony planes.
she gaped at him, taken by surprise when he gathered her into his arms and kissed her. for a moment
she clung to him, lost, kissing him back. her feet dangled a foot in the air, and she did not care.
suddenly she pushed at him, pulled her face back. no. she pushed harder. let me go. put me
down. puzzled, he lowered her until her feet touched ground; she backed away from him. not this,
she said. i cannot face this. anything but this. please, let me face aginor again . memory swirled.
aginor? she did not know where that thought had come from. memory lurched and tilted, shifting
fragments like broken ice on a flooding river. she clawed for the pieces, clawed for something to hang on
to.
are you well, my love? lan asked worriedly.
do not call me that! i am not your love! i cannot marry you!
he startled her by throwing back his head and roaring with laughter. your implication that we are not
married might upset our children, wife. and how are you not my love? i have no other, and will have no
other.
i must go back. desperately she looked for the arch, found only meadow and sky.harder than steel
and more deadly than poison. lan. lans babies. light, help me! i must go back now.
go back? where? to emonds field? if you wish it. ill send letters to morgase, and command an
escort.
alone, she muttered, still searching.where is it? i have to go . i wont be tangled up in this. i
couldnt bear it. not this. i have to gonow! 
tangled up in what, nynaeve? what is it you couldnt bear? no, nynaeve. you can ride alone here if
you wish it, but if the queen of the malkieri came to andor without a proper escort, morgase would be
scandalized, if not offended. you dont want to offend her, do you? i thought you two were friends.
nynaeve felt as if she had been hit in the head, blow after dazing blow. queen? she said hesitantly.
we have babies?
are you certain youre well? i think i had better take you to sharina sedai.
no. she backed away from him again. no aes sedai.it isnt real. i wont be pulled into it this
time. i wont!
very well, he said slowly. as my wife, how could you not be queen? we are malkieri here, not
southlanders. you were crowned in the seven towers at the same time we exchanged rings.



unconsciously he moved his left hand; a plain gold band encircled his forefinger. she glanced at her own
hand, at the ring she knew would be there; she clasped her other hand over it, but whether to deny its
presence by hiding it or to hold it, she could not have said. do you remember, now? he went on. he
stretched out a hand as if to brush her cheek, and she went back another six steps. he sighed. as you
wish, my love. we have three children, though only one can properly be called a baby. maric is almost to
your shoulder and cant decide if he likes horses or books better. elnore has already begun practicing
how to turn boys heads, when she is not pestering sharina about when shell be old enough to go to the
white tower.
elnore was my mothers name, she said softly.
so you said when you chose it. nynaeve  
no. i will not be pulled into it this time. not this. i wont! beyond him, among the trees beside the
meadow, she saw the silver arch. the trees had hidden it before.the way back will come but once .
she turned toward it. i must go. he caught her hand, and it was as if her feet had become rooted in
stone; she could not make herself pull away.
i do not know what is troubling you, wife, but whatever it is, tell me and i will make it right. i know i
am not the best of husbands. i was all hard edges when i found you, but youve smoothed some of them
away, at least.
you are the very best of husbands, she murmured. to her horror, she found herself remembering him
as her husband, remembering laughter and tears, bitter arguments and sweet making up. they were dim
memories, but she could feel them growing stronger, warmer. i cannot. the arch stood there, only a
few steps away.the way back will come but once. be steadfast.
i do not know what is happening, nynaeve, but i feel as if i were losing you. i could not bear that. he
put a hand in her hair; closing her eyes, she pressed her cheek against his fingers. stay with me, always.
i want to stay, she said softly. i want to stay with you. when she opened her eyes, the arch was
gone . . .come but once . no. no!
lan turned her to face him. what troubles you? you must tell me if im to help.
this is not real.
not real? before i met you, i thought nothing except the sword was real. look around you, nynaeve.
itis real. whatever you want to be real, we can make real together, you and i.
wonderingly, she did look around. the meadow was still there. the seven towers still stood over the
thousand lakes. the arch was gone, but nothing else had changed.i could stay here. with lan.
nothing has changed . her thoughts turned.nothing has changed. egwene is alone in the white
tower. rand will channel the power and go mad. and what of mat and perrin? can they take
back any shred of their lives? and moiraine, who tore all our lives apart, still walks free.
i must go back, she whispered. unable to bear the pain on his face, she pulled free of him.
deliberately she formed a flower bud in her mind, a white bud on a blackthorn branch. she made the
thorns sharp and cruel, wishing they could pierce her flesh, feeling as if she already hung in the
blackthorns branches. sheriam sedais voice danced just out of hearing, telling her it was dangerous to
attempt to channel the power. the bud opened, andsaidar filled her with light.



nynaeve, tell me what is the matter.
lans voice slid across her concentration; she refused to let herself hear it. there had to be a way back
still. staring at where the silver arch had been, she tried to find some trace of it. there was nothing.
nynaeve . . .
she tried to picture the arch in her mind, to shape it and form it to the last detail, curve of gleaming metal
filled with a glow like snowy fire. it seemed to waver there, in front of her, first there between her and the
trees, then not, then there . . .
. . . i love you . . .
she drew atsaidar , drinking in the flow of the one power till she thought she would burst. the radiance
filling her, shining around her, hurt her own eyes. the heat seemed to consume her. the flickering arch
firmed, steadied, stood whole before her. fire and pain seemed to fill her; her bones felt as if they were
burning; her skull seemed a roaring furnace.
. . . with all my heart.
she ran toward the silver curve, not letting herself look back. she had been sure the bitterest thing she
would ever hear was marin alveres cry for help as nynaeve abandoned her, but that was honey beside
the sound of lans anguished voice pursuing her. nynaeve, please dont leave me.
the white glow consumed her.
naked, nynaeve staggered through the arch and fell to her knees, slackmouthed and sobbing, tears
streaming down her cheeks. sheriam knelt beside her. she glared at the redhaired aes sedai. i hate
you! she managed fiercely, gulping. i hate all aes sedai!
sheriam gave a small sigh, then pulled nynaeve to her feet. child, almost every woman who does this
says much the same thing. it is no small thing to be made to face your fears. what is this? she said
sharply, turning nynaeves palms up.
nynaeves hands quivered with a sudden pain she had not felt before. driven through the palm of each
hand, right in the center, was a long black thorn. sheriam drew them out carefully; nynaeve felt the cool
healing of the aes sedais touch. when each thorn came free, it left only a small scar on front and back
of the hand.
sheriam frowned. there shouldnt be any scarring. and how did you only get two, and both placed so
precisely? if you tangled yourself in a blackthorn bush, you should be covered with scratches and
thorns.
i should, nynaeve agreed bitterly. maybe i thought i had already paid enough.
there is always a price, the aes sedai agreed. come, now. you have paid the first price. take what
you have paid for. she gave nynaeve a slight push forward.
nynaeve realized there were more aes sedai in the chamber. the amyrlin in her striped stole was there,
with a shawled sister from each ajah ranged to either side of her, all of them watching nynaeve.



remembering sheriams instruction, nynaeve tottered forward and knelt before the amyrlin. it was she
who held the last chalice, and she tipped it slowly over nynaeves head.
you are washed clean of nynaeve almaera from emonds field. you are washed clean of all ties that
bind you to the world. you come to us washed clean, in heart and soul. you are nynaeve almaera,
accepted of the white tower. handing the chalice to one of the sisters, the amyrlin drew nynaeve to
her feet. you are sealed to us, now.
the amyrlins eyes seemed to hold a dark glow. nynaeves shiver had nothing to do with being naked
and wet.

chapter 24

new friends and old enemies

egwene followed the accepted through the halls of the white tower. tapestries and paintings covered
walls as white as the outside of the tower; patterned tiles made the floor. the accepteds white dress
was exactly like hers, except for seven narrow bands of color at hem and cuffs. egwene frowned,
looking at that dress. since yesterday nynaeve had worn an accepteds dress, and she seemed to have
no joy of it, nor of the golden ring, a serpent eating its own tail, that marked her level. the few times
egwene had been able to see the wisdom, nynaeves eyes had seemed shadowed, as if she had seen
things she wished with all her heart not to have seen.
in here, the accepted said curtly, gesturing to a door. named pedra, she was a short, wiry woman, a
little older than nynaeve, and with a briskness always in her voice. youre given this time because it is
your first day, but ill expect you in the scullery when the gong sounds high, and not one moment later.
egwene curtsied, then stuck out her tongue at the accepteds retreating back. it might have been only
the evening before that sheriam had finally put her name in the novice book, but already she knew she
did not like pedra. she pushed open the door and went in.
the room was plain and small, with white walls, and there was a young woman, with reddish gold hair
spilling around her shoulders, sitting on one of two hard benches. the floor was bare; novices did not get
much use of rooms with carpets. egwene thought the girl was about her own age, but there was a dignity
and selfpossession about her that made her seem older. the plainly cut novice dress appeared somehow
more, on her. elegant. that was it.
my name is elayne, she said. she tilted her head, studying egwene. and you are egwene. from
emonds field, in the two rivers. she said it as if it had some significance, but went right on anyway.



someone who has been here a little while is always assigned to a new novice for a few days, to help her
find her way. sit, please.
egwene took the other bench, facing elayne. i thought the aes sedai would teach me, now that im
finally a novice. but all thats happened so far is that pedra woke me a good two hours before first light
and put me to sweeping the halls. she says i have to help wash dishes after dinner, too.
elayne grimaced. i hate washing dishes. i never had to  well, that doesnt matter. you will have
training. from now on, you will be at training at this hour every day, as a matter of fact. from breakfast
until high, then again from dinner to trine. if you are especially quick or especially slow, they may take
you from supper to full, as well, but that is usually for more chores. elaynes blue eyes took on a
thoughtful expression. you were born with it, werent you? egwene nodded. yes, i thought i felt it.
so was i, born with it. do not be disappointed if you did not know. you will learn to feel the ability in
other women. i had the advantage of growing up around an aes sedai.
egwene wanted to ask about that who grows up with aes sedai?  but elayne went on.
and also do not be disappointed if it takes you some time before you can achieve anything. with the
one power, i mean. even the simplest thing takes a little time. patience is a virtue that must be learned.
her nose wrinkled. sheriam sedai always says that, and she does her best to make us all learn it, too.
try to run when she says walk, and shell have you in her study before you can blink.
ive had a few lessons already, egwene said, trying to sound modest. she opened herself tosaidar 
that part of it was easier now  and felt the warmth suffuse her body. she decided to try the biggest
thing she knew how to do. she stretched out her hand, and a glowing sphere formed over it, pure light. it
wavered  she still could not manage to hold it steady  but it was there.
calmly, elayne held out her hand, and a ball of light appeared above her palm. hers flickered, too.
after a moment, a faint light glowed all around elayne. egwene gasped, and her ball vanished.
elayne giggled suddenly, and her light went out, both the sphere and the light around her. you saw it
around me? she said excitedly. i saw it around you. sheriam sedai said i would, eventually. this was
the first time. for you, too?
egwene nodded, laughing along with the other girl. i like you, elayne. i think were going to be friends.
i think so, too, egwene. you are from the two rivers, from emonds field. do you know a boy
named rand althor?
i know him. abruptly egwene found herself remembering a tale rand had told, a tale she had not
believed, about falling off a wall into a garden and meeting . . . youre the daughterheir of andor, she
gasped.
yes, elayne said simply. if sheriam sedai as much as heard id mentioned it, i think she would have
me into her study before i finished talking.
everyone talks about being called to sheriams study. even the accepted. does she scold so fiercely?
she seems kindly to me.
elayne hesitated, and when she spoke it was slowly, not meeting egwenes eye. she keeps a willow



switch on her desk. she says if you cant learn to follow the rules in a civilized way, she will teach you
another way. there are so many rules for novices, it is very hard not to break some of them, she
finished.
but thats  thats horrible! im not a child, and neither are you. i wont be treated as one.
but we are children. the aes sedai, the full sisters, are the grown women. the accepted are the young
women, old enough to be trusted without someone looking over their shoulders every moment. and
novices are the children, to be protected and cared for, guided in the way they should go, and punished
when they do what they should not. that is the way sheriam sedai explains it. no one is going to punish
you over your lessons, not unless you try something youve been told not to. it is hard not to try,
sometimes; you will find you want to channel as much as you want to breathe. but if you break too many
dishes because you are daydreaming when you should be washing, if youre disrespectful to an
accepted, or leave the tower without permission, or speak to an aes sedai before she speaks to you,
or . . . the only thing to do is the best you can. there isnt anything elseto do.
it sounds almost as if theyre trying to make us want to leave, egwene protested.
they arent, but then again, they are. egwene, there are only forty novices in the tower. only forty,
and no more than seven or eight will become accepted. that is not enough, sheriam sedai says. she
says there are not enough aes sedai now to do what needs to be done. but the tower will not . . .
cannot . . . lower its standards. the aes sedai cannot take a woman as a sister if she does not have the
ability, and the strength, and the desire. they cant give the ring and the shawl to one who cannot channel
the power well enough, or who will allow herself to be intimidated, or who will turn back when the road
turns rough. training and testing take care of the channeling, and for strength and desire . . . well, if you
want to go, they will let you. once you know enough that you wont die of ignorance.
i suppose, egwene said slowly, sheriam told us some of that. i never thought about there not being
enough aes sedai, though.
she has a theory. she says we have culled humankind. you know about culling? cutting out of the herd
those animals that have traits you dont like? egwene nodded impatiently; no one could grow up around
sheep without knowing about culling the flock. sheriam sedai says that with the red ajah hunting down
men who could channel for three thousand years, we are culling the ability to channel out of us all. i
would not mention this around any reds, if i were you. sheriam sedai has been in more than one
shouting match over it, and we are only novices.
i wont.
elayne paused, and then said, is rand well?
egwene felt a sudden stab of jealousy  elayne was very pretty  but over it came a stronger stab of
fear. she went over the little she knew of rands one meeting with the daughterheir, reassuring herself:
elayne could not possibly know that rand could channel.
egwene?
he is as well as he can be.i hope he is, the woolheaded idiot. he was riding with some shienaran
soldiers the last i saw him.
shienarans! he told me he was a shepherd. she shook her head. i find myself thinking of him at the



oddest times. elaida thinks he is important in some way. she didnt come right out and say so, but she
ordered a search for him, and she was in a fury when she learned he had left caemlyn.
elaida?
elaida sedai. my mothers councilor. she is red ajah, but mother seems to like her despite that.
egwenes mouth felt dry.red ajah, and interested in rand . i  i dont know where he is, now. he
left shienar, and i dont think he was going back.
elayne gave her a level look. i would not tell elaida where to find him if i knew, egwene. he has done
no wrong that i know, and i fear she wants to use him in some manner. anyway, ive not seen her since
the day we arrived, with whitecloaks dogging our trail. they are still camped on the dragonmount side.
abruptly she bounded to her feet. let us talk of happier things. there are two others here who know
rand, and i would like you to meet one of them. she took egwenes hand and pulled her out of the
room.
two girls? rand seems to meet a lot of girls.
ummm? still drawing egwene down the corridor, elayne studied her. yes. well. one of them is a
lazy chit named else grinwell. i dont think she will be here long. she shirks her chores, and she is
always sneaking off to watch the warders practice their swords. she says rand came to her fathers
farm, with a friend of his. mat. it seems they put notions of the world beyond the next village into her
head, and she ran away to come be an aes sedai.
men, egwene muttered. i dance a few dances with a nice boy, and rand goes around looking like a
dog with a sore tooth, but he   she cut off as a man stepped into the hall ahead of them. beside her,
elayne stopped, too, and her hand tightened on egwenes.
there was nothing alarming about him, aside from the suddenness of his appearance. he was tall and
handsome, short of middle years, with long, dark curling hair, but his shoulders sagged, and there was
sadness in his eyes. he made no move toward egwene and elayne, only stood looking at them until one
of the accepted appeared at his shoulder.
you should not be in here, she said to him, not unkindly.
i wanted to walk. his voice was deep, and as sad as his eyes.
you can walk out in the garden, where you are supposed to be. the sunshine will be good for you.
the man rumbled a bitter laugh. with two or three of you watching my every move? youre just afraid
ill find a knife. at the look in the accepteds eyes, he laughed again. for myself, woman. for myself.
lead me to your garden, and your watching eyes.
the accepted touched his arm lightly, and led him away.
logain, elayne said when he was gone.
the false dragon!
he has been gentled, egwene. he is no more dangerous than any other man, now. but i remember



seeing him before, when it took six aes sedai to keep him from wielding the power and destroying us
all. she shivered.
egwene did, too. that was what the red ajah would do to rand.
do they always have to be gentled? she asked. elayne stared at her, mouth agape, and she quickly
added, it is just that id think the aes sedai would find some other way to deal with them. anaiya and
moiraine both said the greatest feats of the age of legends required men and women working together
with the power. i just thought theyd try to find a way.
well, do not let any red sister hear you thinking it aloud. egwene, they did try. for three hundred years
after the white tower was built, they tried. they gave up because there was nothing to find. come on. i
want you to meet min. not in the garden where logain is going, thank the light.
the name sounded vaguely familiar to egwene, and when she saw the young woman, she knew why.
there was a narrow stream in the garden, with a low stone bridge over it, and min sat crosslegged on
the wall of the bridge. she wore a mans tight breeches and baggy shirt, and with her dark hair cut short
she could almost pass for a boy, though an uncommonly pretty one. a gray coat lay beside her on the
coping.
i know you, egwene said. you worked at the inn in baerlon. a light breeze riffled the water beneath
the bridge, and graywings warbled in the trees of the garden.
min smiled. and you were one of those who brought the darkfriends down on us to burn it down. no,
dont worry. the messenger who came to fetch me brought enough gold that master fitch is building it
back again twice as big. good morning, elayne. not slaving over your lessons? or over some pots? it
was said in a bantering tone, as between friends, as elaynes answering grin proved.
i see sheriam has not yet managed to get you into a dress.
mins laugh was wicked. im no novice. she made her voice squeaky. yes, aes sedai. no, aes
sedai. may i sweep another floor, aes sedai? i, she said, resuming her own low voice, clothe myself
the way i want. she turned to egwene. is rand well?
egwenes mouth tightened.he should wear rams horns like a trolloc , she thought angrily. i was
sorry when your inn caught fire, and i am glad master fitch was able to rebuild. why have you come to
tar valon? its clear you do not mean to be an aes sedai. min arched an eyebrow in what egwene
was sure was amusement.
she likes him, elayne explained.
i know. min glanced at egwene, and for an instant egwene thought she saw sadness  or regret? 
in her eyes. i am here, min said carefully, because i was sent for, and was given the choice between
riding and coming tied in a sack.
you always exaggerate it, elayne said. sheriam sedai saw the letter, and she says it was a request.
min sees things, egwene. thats why shes here; so the aes sedai can study how she does it. it isnt the
power.
request, min snorted. when an aes sedai requests your presence, its like a command from a queen
with a hundred soldiers to back it up.



everybody sees things, egwene said.
elayne shook her head. not like min. she sees  auras  around people. and images.
not all the time, min put in. not around everybody.
and she can read things about you from them, though im not sure she always tells the truth. she said
id have to share my husband with two other women, and id never put up with that. she just laughs, and
says it was never her idea of how to run things, either. but she said i would be a queen before she knew
who i was; she said she saw a crown, and it was the rose crown of andor.
despite herself, egwene asked, what do you see when you look at me?
min glanced at her. a white flame, and . . . oh, all sorts of things. i dont know what it means.
she says that a great deal, elayne said dryly. one of the things she said she saw looking at me was a
severed hand. not mine, she says. she claims she does not know what it means, either.
because i dont, min said. i dont know what half of it means.
the crunch of boots on the walk brought them around to look at two young men with their shirts and
coats across their arms, leaving sweaty chests bare, and scabbarded swords in their hands. egwene
found herself staring at the most handsome man she had ever seen. tall and slim, but hard, he moved
with a catlike grace. she suddenly realized he was bowing over her hand  she had not even felt him
take it in his  and fumbled in her mind for the name she had heard.
galad, she murmured. his dark eyes stared back into hers. he was older than she. older than rand.
at the thought of rand, she gave a start and came to herself.
and i am gawyn  the other young man grinned  since i dont think you heard the first time. min
was grinning, too, and only elayne wore a frown.
egwene abruptly remembered her hand, still held by galad, and freed it.
if your duties allow, galad said, i would like to see you again, egwene. we could walk, or if you
obtain permission to leave the tower, we could picnic outside the city.
that  that would be nice. she was uncomfortably aware of the others, min and gawyn still with
their amused grins, elayne still with her scowl.
she tried to settle herself, to think of rand.hes so . . .beautiful . she gave a jump, half afraid she had
spoken aloud.
until then. finally taking his eyes from hers, galad bowed to elayne. sister. lithe as a blade, he
strolled on across the bridge.
that one, min murmured, peering after him, will always do what is right. no matter who it hurts.
sister? egwene said. elaynes scowl had lessened only slightly. i thought he was your . . . i mean, the
way youre frowning . . . she had thought elayne was jealous, and she still was not sure.



i am not his sister, elayne said firmly. i refuse to be.
our father was his father, gawyn said dryly. you cannot deny that, unless you want to call mother a
liar, and that, i think, would take more nerve than we have between us.
for the first time egwene realized that he had the same reddish gold hair as elayne, though darkened
and curled by sweat.
min is right, elayne said. galad has not the smallest part of humanity in him. he takes right above
mercy, or pity, or . . . he is no more human than a trolloc.
gawyns grin came back. i do not know about that. not from the way he was looking at egwene,
here. he caught her look, and his sisters, and held up his hands as if to fend them off with his sheathed
sword. besides, he has the best hand with a sword ive ever seen. the warders only need show him
something once, and hes learned it. they sweat me nearly to death to learn half what galad does without
trying.
and being good with a sword is enough? elayne sniffed. men! egwene, as you may have guessed,
this disgracefully unclothed lummox is my brother. gawyn, egwene knows rand althor. she is from the
same village.
is she? was he really born in the two rivers, egwene?
egwene made herself nod calmly.what does he know? of course, he was. i grew up with him.
of course, gawyn said slowly. such a strange fellow. a shepherd, he said, though he never looked
or acted like any shepherd i ever saw. strange. i have met all sorts of people, and theyve met rand
althor. some do not even know his name, but the description could not be anyone else, and hes shifted
every one of their lives. there was an old farmer who came to caemlyn just to see logain, when logain
was brought through on his way here; yet the farmer stayed to stand for mother when the riots started.
because of a young man off to see the world, who made him think there was more to life than his farm.
rand althor. you could almost think he wastaveren . elaida is certainly interested in him. i wonder if
meeting him will shift our lives in the pattern?
egwene looked at elayne and min. she was sure they could not have a clue that rand really was
taveren . she had never really thought about that part of it before; he was rand, and he had been
cursed with the ability to channel. buttaveren did move people, whether they wanted to be moved or
not. i really do like you, she said abruptly, including both girls in her gesture. i want to be your friend.
and i want to be yours, elayne said.
impulsively, egwene hugged her, and then min jumped down, and the three of them stood there on the
bridge hugging one another all together.
we threeare tied together, min said, and we cannot let any man get in the way of that. not even
him.
would one of you mind telling me what this is all about? gawyn inquired gently.
you would not understand, his sister said, and the three girls all caught a fit of the giggles.



gawyn scratched his head, then shook it. well, if it has anything to do with rand althor, be sure you
dont let elaida hear of it. she has been at me like a whitecloak questioner three times since we arrived.
i do not think she means him any   he gave a start; there was a woman crossing the garden, a woman
in a redfringed shawl. name the dark one, he quoted, and he appears. i do not need another
lecture about wearing my shirt when im out of the practice yards. good morning to you all.
elaida spared a glance for the departing gawyn as she came up the bridge. she was a handsome
woman rather than beautiful, egwene thought, but that ageless look marked her as surely as her shawl;
only the newestmade sisters lacked it. when her gaze swept over egwene, pausing only a moment,
egwene suddenly saw a hardness in the aes sedai. she had always thought of moiraine as strong, steel
under silk, but elaida dispensed with the silk.
elaida, elayne said, this is egwene. she was born with the seed in her, too. and she has already had
some lessons, so she is as far along as i am. elaida?
the aes sedais face was blank and unreadable. in caemlyn, child, i am councilor to the queen your
mother, but this is the white tower, and you, a novice. min made as if to go, but elaida stopped her
with a sharp, stay, girl. i would speak with you.
ive known you all my life, elaida, elayne said incredulously. you watched me grow up, and made
the gardens bloom in winter so i could play.
child, there you were the daughterheir. here you are a novice. you must learn that. you will be great
one day, but you must learn!
yes, aes sedai.
egwene was astounded. if someone had snubbed her so before others, she would have been in a fury.
now, off with both of you. a gong began to toll, deep and sonorous, and elaida tilted her head. the
sun stood halfway to its pinnacle. high, elaida said. you must hurry, if you do not want further
admonishment. and elayne? see the mistress of novices in her study after your chores. a novice does
not speak to aes sedai unless bidden to. run, both of you. you will be late. run!
they ran, holding their skirts up. egwene looked at elayne. elayne had two spots of color in her cheeks
and a determined look on her face.
i will be aes sedai, elayne said softly, but it sounded like a promise.
behind them, egwene heard the aes sedai begin, i am given to understand, girl, that you were brought
here by moiraine sedai.
she wanted to stay and listen, to hear if elaida asked about rand, but high rang through the white
tower, and she was summoned to chores. she ran as she had been commanded to run.
i will be aes sedai, she growled. elayne flashed a quick smile of understanding, and they ran faster.
mins shirt clung to her when she finally left the bridge. not sweat from the sun, but from the heat of
elaidas questions. she looked over her shoulder to make sure the aes sedai was not following her, but
elaida was nowhere in sight.



how did elaida know that moiraine had summoned her? min had been sure that was a secret known
only to her, moiraine, and sheriam. and all those questions about rand. it had not been easy keeping a
smooth face and a steady eye while telling an aes sedai to her face that she had never heard of him and
knew nothing of him.what does shewant with him? light, what does moiraine want with him? what
is he? light, i dont want to fall in love with a man ive only met once, and a farmboy at that.
moiraine, the light blind you, she muttered, whatever you brought me here for, come out from
wherever youre hiding and tell me so i can go!
the only answer was the sweet song of the graywings. with a grimace she went in search of a place to
cool off.

chapter 25

cairhien

the city of cairhien lay across hills against the river alguenya, and rands first sight of it came from the
hills to the north, by the light of the midday sun. elricain tavolin and the fifty cairhienin soldiers still
seemed like guards to him  the more since crossing the bridge at the gaelin; they became more stiff the
further south they rode  but loial and hurin did not appear to mind, so he tried not to. he studied the
city, as large as any he had seen. fat ships and broad barges filled the river, and tall granaries sprawled
along the far bank, but cairhien seemed to be laid out in a precise grid behind its high, gray walls. those
walls themselves made a perfect square, with one side hard along the river. in just as exact a pattern,
towers rose within the walls, soaring as much as twenty times the height of the wall, yet even from the hills
rand could see that each one ended in a jagged top.
outside the city walls, surrounding them from riverbank to riverbank, lay a warren of streets,
crisscrossing at all angles and teeming with people. foregate, rand knew it was called, from hurin; once
there had been a market village for every city gate, but over the years they had all grown into one, a
hodgepodge of streets and alleys growing up every which way.
as rand and the others rode into those dirt streets, tavolin put some of his soldiers to clearing a path
through the throng, shouting and urging their horses forward as if to trample any who did not get out of
the way quickly. people moved aside with no more than a glance, as if it were an everyday occurrence.
rand found himself smiling, though.
the foregate peoples clothes were shabby more often than not, yet much of it was colorful, and there
was a raucous bustle of life to the place. hawkers cried their wares, and shopkeepers called for people



to examine the goods displayed on tables before their shops. barbers, fruitpeddlers, knifesharpeners,
men and women offering a dozen services and a hundred things for sale, wandered through the crowds.
music drifted through the babble from more than one structure; at first rand thought they were inns, but
the signs out front all showed men playing flutes or harps, tumbling or juggling, and large as they were,
they had no windows. most of the buildings in foregate seemed to be wood, however big they were,
and a good many looked new, if poorly made. rand gaped at several that stood seven stories or more;
they swayed slightly, though the people hurrying in and out did not seem to notice.
peasants, tavolin muttered, staring straight ahead in disgust. look at them, corrupted by outland
ways. they should not be here.
where should they be? rand asked. the cairhienin officer glared at him and spurred his horse
forward, flogging at the crowd with his quirt.
hurin touched rands arm. it was the aiel war, lord rand. he looked to make sure none of the
soldiers were close enough to hear. many of the farmers were afraid to go back to their lands near the
spine of the world, and they all came here, near enough. thats why galldrian has the river full of grain
barges up from andor and tear. theres no crops coming from farms in the east because there arent
any farms anymore. best not to mention it to a cairhienin though, my lord. they like to pretend the war
never happened, or at least that they won it.
despite tavolins quirt, they were forced to halt while a strange procession crossed their path. half a
dozen men, beating tambours and dancing, led the way for a string of huge puppets, each half again as tall
as the men who worked them with long poles. giant crowned figures of men and women in long, ornate
robes bowed to the crowd amid the shapes of fanciful beasts. a lion with wings. a goat, walking on its
hind legs, with two heads, both of which were apparently meant to be breathing fire, from the crimson
streamers hanging from the two mouths. something that seemed to be half cat and half eagle, and another
with a bears head on a mans body, which rand took to be a trolloc. the crowd cheered and laughed
as they pranced by.
man who made that never saw a trolloc, hurin grumbled. heads too big, and its too skinny. likely
didnt believe in them, either, my lord, any more than in those other things. the only monsters these
foregate folk believe in are aiel.
are they having a festival? rand asked. he did not see any sign of it other than the procession, but he
thought that there must be a reason for that. tavolin ordered his soldiers forward again.
no more than every day, rand, loial said. walking alongside his horse, the blanketwrapped chest
still strapped to his saddle, the ogier drew as many looks as the puppets had. some even laughed and
clapped as they had for the puppets. i fear galldrian keeps his people quiet by entertaining them. he
gives gleemen and musicians the kings gift, a bounty in silver, to perform here in the foregate, and he
sponsors horse races down by the river every day. there are fireworks many nights, too. he sounded
disgusted. elder haman says galldrian is a disgrace. he blinked, realizing what he had said, and
looked around hurriedly to see if any of the soldiers had heard. none seemed to have.
fireworks, hurin said, nodding. the illuminators have built a chapter house here, ive heard, the
same as in tanchico. i didnt half mind seeing the fireworks, when i was here before.
rand shook his head. he had never seen fireworks elaborate enough to require even one illuminator. he
had heard they only left tanchico to put on displays for rulers. it was a strange place he was coming to.



at the tall, square archway of the city gate, tavolin ordered a halt and dismounted by a squat stone
building just inside the walls. it had arrowslits instead of windows, and a heavy, ironbound door.
a moment, my lord rand, the officer said. tossing his reins to one of the soldiers, he disappeared
inside.
with a wary look at the soldiers  they sat their horses rigidly in two long files; rand wondered what
they would do if he and loial and hurin tried to leave  he took the opportunity to study the city that lay
before him.
cairhien proper was a sharp contrast to the chaotic bustle of the foregate. broad, paved streets, wide
enough to make the people in them seem fewer than they were, crossed each other at right angles. just as
in tremonsien, the hills had been carved and terraced to straight lines. closed sedan chairs, some with
small pennants bearing the sigil of a house, moved with deliberateness, and carriages rolled down the
streets slowly. people went silently in dark clothes, with no bright colors except here and there slashes
across the breast of coat or dress. the more slashes, the more proudly the wearer moved, but no one
laughed, or even smiled. the buildings on their terraces were all of stone, and the ornamentation was
straightlined and sharpangled. there were no hawkers or peddlers in the streets, and even the shops
seemed subdued, with only small signs and no wares displayed outside.
he could see the great towers more clearly, now. scaffolds of lashed poles surrounded them, and
workmen swarmed on the scaffolding, laying new stones to push the towers higher still.
the topless towers of cairhien, loial murmured sadly. well, they were tall enough to warrant the
name, once. when the aiel took cairhien, about the time you were born, the towers burned, and
cracked, and fell. i dont see any ogier among the stonemasons. no ogier could like working here 
the cairhienin want what they want, without embellishment  but there were ogier when i was here
before.
tavolin came out, trailing another officer and two clerks, one carrying a large, woodbound ledger and
the other a tray with writing implements. the front of the officers head was shaven like tavolins, though
advancing baldness seemed to have taken more hair than the razor. both officers looked from the rand
to the chest hidden by loials striped blanket and back again. neither asked what was under the blanket.
tavolin had looked at it often on the way from tremonsien, but he had never asked, either. the balding
man looked at rands sword, too, and pursed his lips for an instant.
tavolin gave the other officers name as asan sandair, and announced loudly, lord rand of house
althor, in andor, and his man, called hurin, with loial, an ogier of stedding shangtai. the clerk with
the ledger opened it across his two arms, and sandair wrote the names in a round hand.
you must return to this guardhouse by this same hour tomorrow, my lord, sandair said, leaving the
sanding to the second clerk, and give the name of the inn where you are staying.
rand looked at the staid streets of cairhien, then back at the liveliness of the foregate. can you tell me
the name of a good inn out there? he nodded to the foregate.
hurin made a frantichsst and leaned close. it would not be proper, lord rand, he whispered. if you
stay in the foregate, being a lord and all, theyll be sure you are up to something.
rand could see the sniffer was right. sandairs mouth had dropped open and tavolins brows had risen
at his question, and they were both still watching him intently. he wanted to tell them he was not playing



their great game, but instead he said, we will take rooms in the city. we can go now?
of course, my lord rand. sandair made a bow. but . . . the inn?
i will let you know when we find one. rand turned red, then paused. selenes note crackled in his
pocket. i need to find a young woman from cairhien. the lady selene. she is my age, and beautiful. i
dont know her house.
sandair and tavolin exchanged looks, then sandair said, i will make inquiries, my lord. perhaps i will
be able to tell you something when you come tomorrow.
rand nodded and led loial and hurin into the city. they attracted little notice, though there were few
riders. even loial attracted almost none. the people seemed nearly ostentatious about minding their own
business.
will they take it the wrong way, rand asked hurin, my asking after selene?
who can say with cairhienin, lord rand? they seem to think everything has to do withdaes daemar
.
rand shrugged. he felt as if people were looking at him. he could not wait to get a good, plain coat
again, and stop pretending to be what he was not.
hurin knew several inns in the city, though his time in cairhien had been spent mainly in the foregate.
the sniffer led them to one called the defender of the dragonwall, the sign bearing a crowned man with
his foot on another mans chest and his sword at the mans throat. the fellow on his back had red hair.
a hostler came to take their horses, darting quick looks at rand and at loial when he thought he was
not observed. rand told himself to stop having fancies; not everyone in the city could be playing this
game of theirs. and if they were, he was no part of it.
the common room was neat, with the tables laid out as strictly as the city, and only a few people at
them. they glanced up at the newcomers, then back to their wine immediately; rand had the feeling they
were still watching, though, and listening. a small fire burned in the big fireplace, though the day was
warming.
the innkeeper was a plump, unctuous man with a single stripe of green across his dark gray coat. he
gave a start at his first sight of them, and rand was not surprised. loial, with the chest in his arms under
its striped blanket, had to duck his head to make it in through the door, hurin was burdened with all their
saddlebags and bundles, and his own red coat was a sharp contrast to the somber colors the people at
the tables wore.
the innkeeper took in rands coat and his sword, and his oily smile came back. he bowed, washing his
smooth hands. forgive me, my lord. it was just that for a moment i took you for  forgive me. my
brain is not what it was. you wish rooms, my lord? he added another, lesser bow for loial. i am
called cuale, my lord.
he thought i was aiel, rand thought sourly. he wanted to be gone from cairhien. but it was the one
place ingtar might find them. and selene had said she would wait for him in cairhien.
it took a little time for their rooms to be readied, cuale explaining with too many smiles and bows that it



was necessary to move a bed for loial. rand wanted them all to share a room again, but between the
innkeepers scandalized looks and hurins insistence  we have to show these cairhienin we know
whats right as well as they do, lord rand  they ended with two, one for him alone, with a connecting
door.
the rooms were much the same except that theirs had two beds, one sized for an ogier, while his had
only one bed, and that almost as big as the other two, with massive square posts that nearly reached the
ceiling. his tallbacked, padded chair and the washstand were square and massive, too, and the
wardrobe standing against his wall was carved in a heavy, rigid style that made the thing look ready
enough to fall over on him. a pair of windows siding his bed looked out on the street, two floors below.
as soon as the innkeeper left, rand opened the door and admitted loial and hurin into his room. this
place gnaws at me, he told them. everybody looks at you as if they think youre doing something. im
going back to the foregate, for an hour anyway. at least the people laugh, there. which of you is willing
to take the first watch on the horn?
i will stay, loial said quickly. id like a chance to do a little reading. just because i didnt see any
ogier does not mean there are no stonemasons down from stedding tsofu. it is not far from the city.
id think you would want to meet them.
ah . . . no, rand. they asked enough questions the last time about why i was outside alone as it was. if
theyve had word from stedding shangtai . . . well, i will just rest here and read, i think.
rand shook his head. he often forgot that loial had run away from home, in effect, to see the world.
what about you, hurin? theres music in the foregate, and people laughing. ill wager no one is playing
daes daemar there.
i would not be so certain of that myself, lord rand. in any case, i thank you for the invitation, but i
think not. theres so many fights  and killings, too  in foregate, that it stinks, if you know what i
mean. not that theyre likely to bother a lord, of course; the soldiers would be down on them if they did.
but if it pleases you, i would like to have a drink in the common room.
hurin, you dont need my permission for anything. you know that.
as you say, my lord. the sniffer gave a suggestion of a bow.
rand took a deep breath. if they did not leave cairhien soon, hurin would be bowing and scraping left
and right. and if mat and perrin saw that, they would never let him forget it. i hope nothing delays
ingtar. if he doesnt come quickly, well have to take the horn back to fal dara ourselves. he touched
selenes note through his coat. we will have to. loial, ill come back so you can see some of the city.
id rather not risk it, loial said.
hurin accompanied rand downstairs. as soon as they reached the common room, cuale was bowing in
front of rand, pushing a tray at him. three folded and sealed parchments lay on the tray. rand took
them, since that was what the innkeeper seemed to intend. they were a fine grade of parchment, soft and
smooth to his touch. expensive.
what are these? he asked.



cuale bowed again. invitations, of course, my lord. from three of the noble houses. he bowed
himself away.
who would send me invitations? rand turned them over in his hand. none of the men at the tables
looked up, but he had the feeling they were watching just the same. he did not recognize the seals. none
was the crescent moon and stars selene had used. who would know i was here?
everyone by now, lord rand, hurin said quietly. he seemed to feel eyes watching, too. the guards
at the gate would not keep their mouths closed about an outland lord coming to cairhien. the hostler, the
innkeeper . . . everybody tells what they know where they think it will do them the most good, my lord.
with a grimace, rand took two steps and hurled the invitations into the fire. they caught immediately. i
am not playingdaes daemar ,  he said, loudly enough for everyone to hear. not even cuale looked at
him. ive nothing to do with your great game. i am just here to wait for some friends.
hurin caught his arm. please, lord rand. his voice was an urgent whisper. please dont do that
again.
again? you really think ill receive more?
im certain. light, but you mind me of the time teva got so mad at a hornet buzzing round his ears, he
kicked the nest. youve likely just convinced everyone in the room you are in some deep part of the
game. it must be deep, as theyll see it, if you deny playing at all.every lord and lady in cairhien plays
it. the sniffer glanced at the invitations, curling blackly in the fire, and winced. and you have surely
made enemies of three houses. not great houses, or theyd not have moved so quickly, but still noble.
you must answer any more invitations you receive, my lord. decline if you will  though theyll read
things into whose invitations you do decline. and into whose you accept. of course, if you decline them
all, or accept them all  
ill have no part of it, rand said quietly. we are leaving cairhien as soon as we can. he thrust his
fists into his coat pockets, and felt selenes note crumple. pulling it out, he smoothed it on his coat front.
as soon as we can, he muttered, putting it back in his pocket again. have your drink, hurin.
he stalked out angrily, not sure whether he was angry with himself, or with cairhien and its great game,
or selene for vanishing, or moiraine. she had started it all, stealing his coats and giving him a lords
clothes instead. even now that he called himself free of them, an aes sedai still managed to interfere in
his life, and without even being there.
he went back through the same gate by which he had entered the city, since that was the way he knew.
a man standing in front of the guardhouse took note of him  his bright coat marked him out, as well as
his height among the cairhienin  and hurried inside, but rand did not notice. the laughter and music of
the foregate were pulling him on.
if his goldembroidered red coat made him stand out inside the walls, it fit right into the foregate. many
of the men milling through the crowded streets were dressed just as darkly as those in the city, but just as
many wore coats of red, or blue, or green, or gold  some bright enough to be a tinkers clothes 
and even more of the women had embroidered dresses and colored scarves or shawls. most of the
finery was tattered and illfitting, as if made for someone else originally, but if some of those who wore it
eyed his fine coat, none seemed to take it amiss.
once he had to stop for another procession of giant puppets. while the drummers beat their tambours



and capered, a pigfaced trolloc with tusks fought a man in a crown. after a few desultory blows, the
trolloc collapsed to laughter and cheers from the onlookers.
rand grunted.they dont die so easily as that.
he glanced into one of the large, windowless buildings, stopping to look through the door. to his
surprise, it seemed to be one huge room, open to the sky in the middle and lined with balconies, with a
large dais at one end. he had never seen or heard of anything like it. people jammed the balconies and
the floor watching people perform on the dais. he peeked into others as he passed them, and saw
jugglers, and musicians, any number of tumblers, and even a gleeman, with his cloak of patches,
declaiming a story fromthe great hunt of the horn in sonorousvoice high chant.
that made him think of thom merrilin, and he hurried on. memories of thom were always sad. thom
had been a friend. a friend who had died for him.while i ran away and let him die.
in another of the big structures, a woman in voluminous white robes appeared to make things vanish
from one basket and appear in another, then disappear from her hands in great puffs of smoke. the
crowd watching heroohed andaahed loudly.
two coppers, my good lord, a ratty little man in the doorway said. two coppers to see the aes
sedai.
i dont think so. rand glanced back at the woman. a white dove had appeared in her hands.aes
sedai? no. he gave the ratty man a small bow and left.
he was making his way through the throng, wondering what to see next, when a deep voice,
accompanied by the plucking of a harp, drifted out from a doorway with the sign of a juggler over it.
. . . cold blows the wind down shara pass; cold lies the grave unmarked. yet every year at sunday,
upon those piled stones appears a single rose, one crystal teardrop like dew upon the petals, laid by the
fair hand of dunsinin, for she keeps fast to the bargain made by rogosh eagleeye.
the voice drew rand like a rope. he pushed through the doorway as applause rose within.
two coppers, my good lord, said a ratfaced man who could have been twin to the other. two
coppers to see  
rand dug out some coins and thrust them at the man. he walked on in a daze, staring at the man bowing
on the dais to the clapping of his listeners, cradling his harp in one arm and with the other spreading his
patchcovered cloak as if to trap all the sound they made. he was a tall man, lanky and not young, with
long mustaches as white as the hair on his head. and when he straightened and saw rand, the eyes that
widened were sharp and blue.
thom. rands whisper was lost in the noise of the crowd.
holding rands eye, thom merrilin nodded slightly toward a small door beside the dais. then he was
bowing again, smiling and basking in the applause.
rand made his way to the door and through it. it was only a small hallway, with three steps leading up to
the dais. in the other direction from the dais rand could see a juggler practicing with colored balls, and
six tumblers limbering themselves.



thom appeared on the steps, limping as though his right leg did not bend as well as it had. he eyed the
juggler and the tumblers, blew out his mustaches disdainfully, and turned to rand. all they want to hear
isthe great hunt of the horn . you would think, with the news from haddon mirk and saldaea, one
of them would ask forthe karaethon cycle . well, maybe not that, but id pay myself to tell something
else. he looked rand up and down. you look as if youre doing well, boy. he fingered rands collar
and pursed his lips. very well.
rand could not help laughing. i left whitebridge sure you were dead. moiraine said you were still alive,
but i . . . light, thom, its good to see you again! i should have gone back to help you.
bigger fool if you had, boy. that fade  he looked around; there was no one close enough to hear,
but he lowered his voice anyway  had no interest in me. it left me a little present of a stiff leg and ran
off after you and mat. all you could have done was die. he paused, looking thoughtful. moiraine said i
was still alive, did she? is she with you, then?
rand shook his head. to his surprise, thom seemed disappointed.
too bad, in a way. shes a fine woman, even if she is . . . he left it unsaid. so it was mat or perrin
she was after. i wont ask which. they were good boys, and i dont want to know. rand shifted
uneasily, and gave a start when thom fixed him with a bony finger. what i do want to know is, do you
still have my harp and flute? i want them back, boy. what i have now are not fit for a pig to play.
i have them, thom. ill bring them to you, i promise. i cant believe you are alive. and i cant believe
you arent in illian. the great hunt setting out. the prize for the best telling ofthe great hunt of the
horn . you were dying to go.
thom snorted. after whitebridge? likely id die if i did go. even if i could have reached the boat
before it sailed, domon and his whole crew would be spreading the tale all over illian about how i was
being chased by trollocs. if they saw the fade, or heard of it, before domon cut his lines . . . most
illianers think trollocs and fades are fables, but enough others might want to know why a man was
pursued by them to make illian somewhat more than uncomfortable.
thom, i have so much to tell you.
the gleeman cut him off. later, boy. he was exchanging glares down the length of the hall with the
narrowfaced man from the door. if i dont go back and tell another, he will no doubt send the juggler
out, and that lot will tear the hall down around our heads. you come to the bunch of grapes, just
beyond the jangai gate. i have a room there. anyone can tell you where to find it. ill be there in another
hour or so. one more tale will have to satisfy them. he started back up the steps, flinging over his
shoulder, and bring my harp and my flute!

chapter 26



discord

rand darted through the common room of the defender of the dragonwall and hurried upstairs,
grinning at the startled look the innkeeper had given him. rand wanted to grin at everything.thoms
alive!
he flung open the door to his room and went straight to the wardrobe.
loial and hurin put their heads in from the other room, both in their shirtsleeves and with pipes in their
teeth trailing thin streams of smoke.
has something happened, lord rand? hurin asked anxiously.
rand slung the bundle made from thoms cloak on his shoulder. the best thing that could, next to
ingtar coming. thom merrilins alive. and hes here, in cairhien.
the gleeman you told me about? loial said. that is wonderful, rand. i would like to meet him.
then come with me, if hurins willing to keep watch awhile.
it would be a pleasure, lord rand.  hurin took the pipe out of his mouth. that lot in the common
room kept trying to pump me  without letting on what they were doing, of course  about who you
are, my lord, and why were in cairhien. i told them we were waiting here to meet friends, but being
cairhienin, they figured i was hiding something deeper.
let them think what they want. come on, loial.
i think not. the ogier sighed. i really would rather stay here. he raised a book with a thick finger
marking his place. i can meet thom merrilin some other time.
loial, you cant stay cooped up in here forever. we do not even know how long well be in cairhien.
anyway, we didnt see any ogier. and if we do, they would not be hunting for you, would they?
not hunting, precisely, but . . . rand, i may have been too hasty in leaving stedding shangtai the way i
did. when i do go home, i may be in a great deal of trouble. his ears wilted. even if i wait until im as
old as elder haman. perhaps i could find an abandonedstedding to stay in until then.
if elder haman wont let you come back, you can live in emonds field. its a pretty place.a
beautiful place.
i am sure it is, rand, but that would never work. you see  



we will talk about it when it comes to that, loial. now you are coming to see thom.
the ogier stood half again as tall as rand, but rand pushed him into his long tunic and cloak and down
the stairs. when they came pounding through the common room, rand winked at the innkeeper, then
laughed at his startled look.let him think im off to play his bloody great game. let him think what
he wants. thoms alive.
once through the jangai gate, in the east wall of the city, everyone seemed to know the bunch of
grapes. rand and loial quickly found themselves there, on a street that was quiet for the foregate, with
the sun halfway down the afternoon sky.
it was an old threestory structure, wooden and rickety, but the common room was clean and full of
people. some men were playing at dice in one corner, and some women at darts in another. half had the
look of cairhienin, slight and pale, but rand heard andoran accents as well as others he did not know.
all wore the clothes of the foregate, though, a blend of the styles of half a dozen countries. a few
looked around when he and loial came in, but they all turned back to what they had been doing.
the innkeeper was a woman with hair as white as thoms, and sharp eyes that studied loial as well as
rand. she was not cairhienin, by her dark skin and her speech. thom merrilin? aye, he has a room.
top of the stairs, first door on the right. likely dena will let you wait for him there  she eyed rands
red coat, with its herons on the high collar and golden brambles embroidered up the sleeves, and his
sword  my lord.
the stairs creaked under rands boots, let alone loials. rand was not sure if the building would stand
up much longer. he found the door and knocked, wondering who dena was.
come in, a womans voice called. i cannot open it for you.
rand opened the door hesitantly and put his head in. a big, rumpled bed was shoved against one wall,
and the rest of the room was all but taken up by a pair of wardrobes, several brassbound trunks and
chests, a table and two wooden chairs. the slender woman sitting crosslegged on the bed with her skirts
tucked under her was keeping six colored balls spinning in a wheel between her hands.
whatever it is, she said, looking at her juggling, leave it on the table. thom will pay you when he
comes back.
are you dena? rand asked.
she snatched the balls out of the air and turned to regard him. she was only a handful of years older than
he, pretty, with fair cairhienin skin and dark hair hanging loose to her shoulders. i do not know you.
this is my room, mine and thom merrilins.
the innkeeper said you might let us wait here for thom, rand said. if youre dena?
us? rand moved into the room so loial could duck inside, and the young womans eyebrows lifted.
so the ogier have come back. i am dena. what do you want? she looked at rands coat so
deliberately that the failure to add my lord had to be purposeful, though her brows went up again at
the herons on his scabbard and sword hilt.
rand hefted the bundle he carried. ive brought thom back his harp and his flute. and i want to visit
with him, he added quickly; she seemed on the point of telling him to leave them. i havent seen him in a



long time.
she eyed the bundle. thom always moans about losing the best flute and the best harp he ever had.
you would think he was a courtbard, the way he carries on. very well. you can wait, but i must
practice. thom says he will let me perform in the halls next week. she rose gracefully and took one of
the two chairs, motioning loial to sit on the bed. zera would make thom pay for six chairs if you broke
one of these, friend ogier.
rand gave their names as he sat in the other chair  it creaked alarmingly under even his weight  and
asked doubtfully, are you thoms apprentice?
dena gave a small smile. you might say that. she had resumed her juggling, and her eyes were on the
whirling balls.
i have never heard of a woman gleeman, loial said.
i will be the first. the one big circle became two smaller, overlapping circles. i will see the whole
world before i am done. thom says once we have enough money, we will go down to tear. she
switched to juggling three balls in each hand. and then maybe out to the sea folks islands. the
athaan miere pay gleemen well.
rand eyed the room, with all the chests and trunks. it did not look like the room of someone intending to
move on soon. there was even a flower growing in a pot on the windowsill. his gaze fell on the single big
bed, where loial was sitting.this is my room, mine and thom merrilins . dena gave him a challenging
look through the large wheel she had resumed. rands face reddened.
he cleared his throat. maybe we ought to wait downstairs, he began when the door opened and
thom came in with his cloak flapping around his ankles, patches fluttering. cased flute and harp hung on
his back; the cases were reddish wood, polished by handling.
dena made the balls disappear inside her dress and ran to throw her arms around thoms neck,
standing atiptoe to do it. i missed you, she said, and kissed him.
the kiss went on for some time, so long that rand was beginning to wonder if he and loial should leave,
but dena let her heels drop to the floor with a sigh.
do you know what that lackwit seaghans done now, girl? thom said, looking down at her. hes
taken on a pack of louts who call themselves players. they walk around pretending tobe rogosh
eagleeye, and blaes, and gaidal cain, and . . . aaagh! they hang a scrap of painted canvas behind
them, supposed to make the audience believe these fools are in matuchin hall, or the high passes of the
mountains of dhoom. i make the listener see every banner, smell every battle, feel every emotion. i
make them believethey are gaidal cain. seaghan will have his hall torn down around his ears if he puts
this lot on to follow me.
thom, we have visitors. loial, son of arent son of halan. oh, and a boy who calls himself rand
althor.
thom looked over her head at rand, frowning. leave us for a while, dena. here. he pressed some
silver coins into her hand. your knives are ready. why dont you go pay ivon for them? he brushed
her smooth cheek with a gnarled knuckle. go on. ill make it up to you.



she gave him a dark look, but she tossed her cloak around her shoulders, muttering, ivon better have
the balance right.
shell be a bard one day, thom said with a note of pride after she was gone. she listens to a tale
once  once only, mind!  and she has it right, not just the words, but every nuance, every rhythm. she
has a fine hand on the harp, and she played the flute better the first time she picked it up than you ever
did. he set the wooden instrument cases atop one of the larger trunks, then dropped into the chair she
had abandoned. when i passed through caemlyn on the way here, basel gill told me youd left in
company with an ogier. among others. he bowed toward loial, even managing a flourish of his cloak
despite the fact that he was sitting on it. i am pleased to meet you, loial, son of arent son of halan.
and i to meet you, thom merrilin. loial stood to make his bow in return; when he straightened, his
head almost brushed the ceiling, and he quickly sat down again. the young woman said she wants to be
a gleeman.
thoms head shake was disparaging. thats no life for a woman. not much of a life for a man, for that.
wandering from town to town, village to village, wondering how theyll try to cheat you this time, half the
time wondering where your next meal is coming from. no, ill talk her around. shell be courtbard to a
king or a queen before shes done. aaaah! you didnt come here to talk about dena. my instruments,
boy. youve brought them?
rand pushed the bundle across the table. thom undid it hurriedly  he blinked when he saw it was his
old cloak, all covered with colorful patches like the one he wore  and opened the hard leather flute
case, nodding at the sight of the goldandsilver flute nestled inside.
i earned my bed and meals with that after we parted, rand said.
i know, the gleeman replied dryly. i stopped at some of the same inns, but i had to make do with
juggling and a few simple stories since you had my  you didnt touch the harp? he pulled open the
other dark leather case and took out a goldandsilver harp as ornate as the flute, cradling it in his hands
like a baby. your clumsy sheepherders fingers were never meant for the harp.
i didnt touch it, rand assured him.
thom plucked two strings, wincing. at least you could have kept it in tune, he muttered.
rand leaned across the table toward him. thom, you wanted to go to illian, to see the great hunt set
out, and be one of the first to make new stories about it, but you couldnt. what would you say if i told
you you could still be a part of it? a big part?
loial stirred uneasily. rand, are you sure . . . ? rand waved him to silence, his eyes on thom.
thom glanced at the ogier and frowned. that would depend on what part, and how. if youve reason
to believe one of the hunters is coming this way . . . i suppose they could have left illian already, but hed
be weeks reaching here if he rode straight on, and why would he? is this one of the fellows who never
went to illian? hell never make it into the stories without the blessing, whatever he does.
it doesnt matter if the hunt has left illian or not. rand heard loials breath catch. thom, we have the
horn of valere.
for a moment there was dead silence. thom broke it with a great guffaw of laughter. you two have the



horn? a shepherd and a beardless ogier have the horn of . . . he doubled over, pounding his knee.
the horn of valere!
but we do have it, loial said seriously.
thom drew a deep breath. small aftershocks of laughter still seemed to catch him unaware. i dont
know what you found, but i can take you to ten taverns where a fellow will tell you that he knows a man
who knows the man whos already found the horn, and he will tell you how it was found, too  as long
as you buy his ale. i can take you to three men who will sell you the horn, and swear their souls under
the light its the real one and true. there is even a lord in the city has what he claims is the horn locked
up inside his manor. he says its a treasure handed down in his house since the breaking. i dont know if
the hunters will ever find the horn, but they will hunt down ten thousand lies along the way.
moiraine says its the horn, rand said.
thoms mirth was cut short. she does, does she? i thought you said she was not with you.
she isnt, thom. i have not seen her since i left fal dara, in shienar, and for a month before that she
said no more than two words together to me. he could not keep the bitterness out of his voice.and
when she did talk, i wished shed kept on ignoring me. ill never dance to her tune again, the
light burn her and every other aes sedai. no. not egwene. not nynaeve . he was conscious of
thom watching him closely. she isnt here, thom. i do not know where she is, and i do not care.
well, at least you have sense enough to keep it secret. if you hadnt, it would be all over the foregate
by now, and half a cairhien would be lying in wait to take it away. half the world.
oh, weve kept it secret, thom. and i have to bring it back to fal dara without darkfriends or anyone
else taking it away. thats story enough for you right there, isnt it? i could use a friend who knows the
world. youve been everywhere; you know things i cant even imagine. loial and hurin know more than
i do, but were all three floundering in deep water.
hurin . . . ? no, dont tell me how. i do not want to know.  the gleeman pushed back his chair and
went to stare out of the window. the horn of valere. that means the last battle is coming. who will
notice? did you see the people laughing in the streets out there? let the grain barges stop a week, and
they wont laugh. galldrian will think theyve all become aiel. the nobles all play the game of houses,
scheming to get close to the king, scheming to gain more power than the king, scheming to pull down
galldrian andbe the next king. or queen. they will think tarmon gaidon is only a ploy in the game.
he turned away from the window. i dont suppose you are talking about simply riding to shienar and
handing the horn to  who?  the king? why shienar? the legends all tie the horn to illian.
rand looked at loial. the ogiers ears were sagging. shienar, because i know who to give it to, there.
and there are trollocs and darkfriends after us.
why does that not surprise me? no. i may be an old fool, but i will be an old fool in my own way. you
take the glory, boy.
thom  
no!
there was a silence, broken only by the creaking of the bed as loial shifted. finally, rand said, loial,



would you mind leaving thom and me alone for a bit? please?
loial looked surprised  the tufts on his ears went almost to points  but he nodded and rose. that
dice game in the common room looked interesting. perhaps they will let me play. thom eyed rand
suspiciously as the door closed behind the ogier.
rand hesitated. there were things he needed to know, things he was sure thom knew  the gleeman
had once seemed to know a great deal about a surprising number of things  but he was not sure how
to ask. thom, he said at last, are there any books that havethe karaethon cycle in them? easier to
call it that than the prophecies of the dragon.
in the great libraries, thom said slowly. any number of translations, and even in the old tongue, here
and there. rand started to ask if there was any way for him to find one, but the gleeman went on. the
old tongue has music in it, but too many even of the nobles are impatient with listening to it these days.
nobles are all expected to know the old tongue, but many only learn enough to impress people who
dont. translations dont have the same sound, unless theyre in high chant, and sometimes that changes
meanings even more than most translations. there is one verse in the cycle  it doesnt scan well,
translated word for word, but theres no meaning lost  that goes like this.

twice and twice shall he be marked,
twice to live, and twice to die.
once the heron, to set his path.
twice the heron, to name him true.
once the dragon, for remembrance lost.
twice the dragon, for the price he must pay.

he reached out and touched the herons embroidered on rands high collar.
for a moment, rand could only gape at him, and when he could speak, his voice was unsteady. the
sword makes five. hilt, scabbard, and blade. he turned his hand down on the table, hiding the brand on
his palm. for the first time since selenes salve had done its work, he could feel it. not hurting, but he
knew it was there.
so they do. thom barked a laugh. theres another comes to mind.

twice dawns the day when his blood is shed.
once for mourning, once for birth.
red on black, the dragons blood stains the rock of shayol ghul.
in the pit of doom shall his blood free men from the shadow.

rand shook his head, denying, but thom seemed not to notice. i dont see how a day can dawn twice,
but then a lot of it doesnt really make much sense. the stone of tear will never fall tillcallandor is
wielded by the dragon reborn, but the sword that cannot be touched lies in the heart of the stone,
so how can he wield it first, eh? well, be that as it may. i suspect aes sedai would want to make events
fit the prophecies as closely as they can. dying somewhere in the blasted lands would be a high price to
pay for going along with them.



it was an effort for rand to make his voice calm, but he did it. no aes sedai are using me for anything.
i told you, the last i saw of moiraine was in shienar. she said i could go where i wanted, and i left.
and theres no aes sedai with you now? none at all?
none.
thom knuckled his dangling white mustaches. he seemed satisfied, and at the same time puzzled. then
why ask about the prophecies? why send the ogier out of the room?
i . . . didnt want to upset him. hes nervous enough about the horn. thats what i wanted to ask. is
the horn mentioned in the  the prophecies? he still could not make himself say it all the way out. all
these false dragons, and now the horn is found. everybody thinks the horn of valere is supposed to
summon dead heroes to fight the dark one in the last battle, and the . . . the dragon reborn . . . is
supposed to fight the dark one in the last battle. it seemed natural enough to ask.
i suppose it is. not many know that about the dragon reborn fighting the last battle, or if they do,
they think hell fight alongside the dark one. not many read the prophecies to find out. what was that
you said about the horn? supposed to?
ive learned a few things since we parted, thom. they will come for whoever blows the horn, even a
darkfriend.
bushy eyebrows rose nearly to thoms hairline. now that i didnt know. you have learned a few
things.
it doesnt mean i would let the white tower use me for a false dragon. i dont want anything to do
with aes sedai, or false dragons, or the power, or . . . rand bit his tongue.get mad and you start
babbling. fool!
for a time, boy, i thought you were the one moiraine wanted, and i even thought i knew why. you
know, no man chooses to channel the power. it is something that happens to him, like a disease. you
cannot blame a man for falling sick, even if it might kill you, too.
your nephew could channel, couldnt he? you told me that was why you helped us, because your
nephew had had trouble with the white tower and there was nobody to help him. theres only one kind
of trouble men can have with aes sedai.
thom studied the tabletop, pursing his lips. i dont suppose there is any use in denying it. you
understand, it is not the kind of thing a man talks about, having a male relative who could channel. aaagh!
the red ajah never gave owyn a chance. they gentled him, and then he died. he just gave up wanting
to live . . . he exhaled sadly.
rand shivered.why didnt moiraine do that to me? a chance, thom? do you mean there was some
way he could have dealt with it? not gone mad? not died?
owyn held it off almost three years. he never hurt anyone. he didnt use the power unless he had to,
and then only to help his village. he . . . thom threw up his hands. i suppose there was no choice. the
people where he lived told me he was acting strange that whole last year. they did not much want to talk
about it, and they nearly stoned me when they found out i was his uncle. i suppose he was going mad.
but he was my blood, boy. i cant love the aes sedai for what they did to him, even if they had to. if



moiraines let you go, then you are well out of it.
for a moment rand was silent.fool! of course theres no way to deal with it. youre going to go
mad and die whatever you do. but baalzamon said  no! he colored under thoms scrutiny. i
mean . . . i am out of it, thom. but i still have the horn of valere. think of it, thom. the horn of
valere. other gleemen might tell tales about it, but you could say you had it in your hands. he realized
he sounded like selene, but all that did was make him wonder where she was. theres nobody id
rather have with us than you, thom.
thom frowned as if considering it, but in the end he shook his head firmly. boy, i like you well enough,
but you know as well as i do that i only helped before because there was an aes sedai mixed in it.
seaghan doesnt try to cheat me more than i expect, and with the kings gift added in, i could never
earn as much in the villages. to my very great surprise, dena seems to love me, and  as much a
surprise  i return the feeling. now, why should i leave that to go be chased by trollocs and
darkfriends? the horn of valere? oh, it is a temptation, ill admit, but no. no, i will not get mixed up in
it again.
he leaned over to pick up one of the wooden instrument cases, long and narrow. when he opened it, a
flute lay inside, plainly made but mounted with silver. he closed it again and slid it across the table. you
might need to earn your supper again someday, boy.
i might at that, rand said. at least we can talk. i will be in  
the gleeman was shaking his head. a clean break is best, boy. if youre always coming around, even if
you never mention it, i wont be able to get the horn out of my head. and i wont be tangled in it. i
wont.
after rand left, thom threw his cloak on the bed and sat with his elbows on the table.the horn of
valere. how did that farmboy find . . . he shut off that line of thought. think about the horn too long,
and he would find himself running off with rand to carry it to shienar.that wouldmake a story, carrying
the horn of valere to the borderlands with trollocs and darkfriends pursuing . scowling, he
reminded himself of dena. even if she had not loved him, talent such as hers was not to be found every
day. and she did love, even if he could not begin to imagine why.
old fool, he muttered.
aye, an old fool, zera said from the door. he gave a start; he had been so absorbed in his thoughts
that he had not heard the door open. he had known zera for years, off and on in his wanderings, and she
always took full advantage of the friendship to speak her mind. an old fool whos playing the game of
houses again. unless my ears are failing, that young lord has the sound of andor on his tongue. hes no
cairhienin, thats for certain sure.daes daemar is dangerous enough without letting an outland lord mix
you in his schemes.
thom blinked, then considered the way rand had looked. that coat had surely been fine enough for a
lord. he was growing old, letting things like that slip by him. ruefully, he realized he was considering
whether to tell zera the truth or let her continue thinking as she did.all it takes is to think about the
great game, and i start playing it . the boy is a shepherd, zera, from the two rivers.
she laughed scornfully. and im the queen of ghealdan. i tell you, the game has grown dangerous in
cairhien the last few years. nothing like what you knew in caemlyn. there are murders done, now.
youll have your throat cut for you, if you dont watch out.



i tell you, i am not in the great game any longer. thats all twenty years in the past, near enough.
aye. she did not sound as if she believed it. but be that as it may, and young outland lords aside,
youve begun performing at the lords manors.
they pay well.
and theyll pull you into their plots as soon as they see how. they see a man, and think how to use him,
as naturally as breathing. this young lord of yours wont help you; they will eat him alive.
he gave up on trying to convince her he was out of it. is that what you came up to say, zera?
aye. forget playing the great game, thom. marry dena. shell take you, the more fool her, bony and
whitehaired as you are. marry her, and forget this young lord anddaes daemar .
i thank you for the advice, he said dryly.marry her? burden her with an old husband. shell never
be a bard with my past hanging around her neck . if you dont mind, zera, i want to be alone for a
while. i perform for lady arilyn and her guests tonight, and i need to prepare.
she gave him a snort and a shake of her head and banged the door shut behind her.
thom drummed his fingers on the table. coat or no coat, rand was still only a shepherd. if he had been
more, if he had been what thom once suspected  a man who could channel  neither moiraine nor
any other aes sedai would ever have let him walk away ungentled. horn or no horn, the boy was only a
shepherd.
he is out of it, he said aloud, and so am i.

chapter 27

the shadow in the night

i do not understand it, loial said. i was winning, most of the time. and then dena came in and joined
the game, and she won it all right back. every toss. she called it a little lesson. what did she mean by
that?
rand and the ogier were making their way through the foregate, the bunch of grapes behind them.
the sun sat low in the west, a red ball half below the horizon, throwing long shadows behind them. the



street was empty save for one of the big puppets, a goathorned trolloc with a sword at its belt, coming
toward them with five men working the poles, but sounds of merriment drifted still from other parts of the
foregate, where the halls of entertainment and the taverns stood. here, doors were already barred and
windows shuttered.
rand stopped fingering the wooden flute case and slung it on his back.i suppose i couldnt expect him
to throw over everything and come with me, but at least he could talk to me. light, i wish ingtar
would show up . he stuffed his hands in his pockets and felt selenes note.
you dont suppose she . . . loial paused uncomfortably. you dont suppose she cheated, do you?
everybody was grinning as if she were doing something clever.
rand shrugged at his cloak.i have to take the horn and go. if we wait for ingtar, anything can
happen. fain will come sooner or later. i have to stay ahead of him . the men with the puppet were
almost to them.
rand, loial said suddenly, i dont think thats a  
abruptly the men let their poles clatter to the packed dirt street; instead of collapsing, the trolloc leaped
for rand with outstretched hands.
there was no time to think. instinct brought the sword out of its sheath in a flashing arc. the moon rises
over the lakes. the trolloc staggered back with a bubbling cry, snarling even as it fell.
for an instant everyone stood frozen. then the men  the darkfriends, they had to be  looked from
the trolloc lying in the street to rand, with the sword in his hands and loial at his side. they turned and
ran.
rand was staring at the trolloc, too. the void had surrounded him before his hand touched hilt;saidin
shone in his mind, beckoning, sickening. with an effort, he made the void vanish, and licked his lips.
without the emptiness, fear crawled on his skin.
loial, we have to get back to the inn. hurins alone, and they   he grunted as he was lifted into the
air by a thick arm long enough to pin both of his to his chest. a hairy hand grabbed his throat. he caught
sight of a tusked snout just over his head. a rank smell filled his nose, equal parts sour sweat and pigsty.
as quickly as it had seized him, the hand at his throat was torn away. stunned, rand stared at it, at the
thick ogier fingers clutching the trollocs wrist.
hold on, rand. loials voice sounded strained. the ogiers other hand came around and took hold of
the arm still holding rand above the ground. hold on.
rand was shaken from side to side as ogier and trolloc struggled. abruptly he fell free. staggering, he
took two steps to get clear and turned back with sword raised.
standing behind the boarsnouted trolloc, loial had it by wrist and forearm, holding its arms spread
wide, breathing hard with the effort. the trolloc snarled gutturally in the harsh trolloc tongue, throwing
its head back in efforts to catch loial with a tusk. their boots scuffled across the dirt of the street.
rand tried to find a place to put his blade in the trolloc without hurting loial, but ogier and trolloc spun
in their rough dance so much that he could find no opening.



with a grunt, the trolloc pulled its left arm free, but before it could loose itself completely, loial snapped
his own arm around its neck, hugging the creature close. the trolloc clawed at its sword; the scythelike
blade hung on the wrong side for lefthanded use, but inch by inch the dark steel began sliding out of the
scabbard. and still they thrashed about so that rand could not strike without risking loial.
the power. that could do it. how, he did not know, but he knew nothing else to try. the trolloc had
its sword half unsheathed. when the curved blade was bare, it would kill loial.
reluctantly, rand formed the void.saidin shone at him, pulled at him. dimly, he seemed to recall a time
when it had sung to him, but now it only drew him, a flowers perfume drawing a bee, a middens stench
drawing a fly. he opened himself up, reached for it. there was nothing there. he could as well have been
reaching for light in truth. the taint slid off onto him, soiling him, but there was no flow of light inside him.
driven by a distant desperation, he tried again and again. and again and again there was only the taint.
with a sudden heave, loial threw the trolloc aside, so hard that the thing cartwheeled against the side of
a building. it struck, headfirst, with a loud crack, and slid down the wall to lie with its neck twisted at an
impossible angle. loial stood staring at it, his chest heaving.
rand looked out of the emptiness for a moment before he realized what had happened. as soon as he
did, though, he let void and tainted light go, and hurried to loials side.
i never . . . killed before, rand. loial drew a shuddering breath.
it would have killed you if you hadnt, rand told him. anxiously, he looked at the alleys and shuttered
windows and barred doors. where there were two trollocs, there had to be more. im sorry you had
to do it, loial, but it would have killed both of us, or worse.
i know. but i cannot like it. even a trolloc. pointing toward the setting sun, the ogier seized rands
arm. theres another of them.
against the sun, rand could not make out details, but it appeared to be another group of men with a
huge puppet, coming toward loial and him. except that now he knew what to look for, the puppet
moved its legs too naturally, and the snouted head rose to sniff the air without anyone lifting a pole. he
did not think the trolloc and darkfriends could see him among the evening shadows, or what lay in the
street around him; they moved too slowly for that. yet it was plain they were hunting, and coming closer.
fain knows i am out here somewhere, he said, hastily wiping his blade on a dead trollocs coat.
hes set them to find me. he is afraid of the trollocs being seen, though, or he wouldnt have them
disguised. if we can reach a street where there are people, well be safe. we have to get back to hurin.
if fain finds him, alone with the horn . . .
he pulled loial along to the next corner and turned toward the nearest sounds of laughter and music, but
long before they reached it, another group of men appeared ahead of them in the otherwise empty street
with a puppet that was no puppet. rand and loial took the next turning. it led east.
every time rand tried to reach the music and laughter, there was a trolloc in the way, often sniffing the
air for a scent. some trollocs hunted by scent. sometimes, here where there were no eyes to see, a
trolloc stalked alone. more than once he was sure it was one he had seen before. they were closing in,
and making sure he and loial did not leave the deserted streets with their shuttered windows. slowly the
two of them were forced east, away from the city and hurin, away from other people, along narrow,



slowly darkening streets that ran in all directions, uphill and down. rand eyed the houses they passed, the
tall buildings closed up tight for the night, with more than a little regret. even if he pounded on a door until
someone opened it, even if they took loial and him in, none of the doors he saw would stop a trolloc.
all that would do would be to offer up more victims with loial and himself.
rand, loial said finally, there is nowhere else to go.
they had reached the eastern edge of the foregate; the tall buildings to either side of them were the last.
lights in windows on the upper stories mocked him, but the lower floors were all shut tight. ahead lay
the hills, cloaked in first twilight and bare of so much as a farmhouse. not entirely empty, though. he
could just make out pale walls surrounding one of the larger hills, perhaps a mile away, and buildings
inside.
once they push us out there, loial said, they wont have to worry who sees them.
rand gestured to the walls around the hill. those should stop a trolloc. it must be a lords manner.
maybe theyll let us in. an ogier, and an outland lord? this coat has to be good for something sooner or
later.  he looked back down the street. no trollocs in sight yet, but he drew loial around the side of
the building anyway.
i think that is the illuminators chapter house, rand. illuminators guard their secrets tightly. i dont think
they would let galldrian himself inside there.
what trouble have you gotten yourself into now? said a familiar womans voice. there was suddenly a
spicy perfume in the air.
rand stared: selene stepped around the corner they had just rounded, her white dress bright in the
dimness. how did you get here? what are you doing here? you have to leave immediately. run! there
are trollocs after us.
so i saw. her voice was dry, yet cool and composed. i came to find you, and i find you allowing
trollocs to herd you like sheep. can the man who possesses the horn of valere let himself be treated
so?
i dont have it with me, he snapped, and i dont know how it could help if i did. the dead heroes are
not supposed to come back to save me from trollocs. selene, you have to get away. now! he peered
around the corner.
not more than a hundred paces away, a trolloc was sticking its horned head cautiously into the street,
smelling the night. a large shadow by its side had to be another trolloc, and there were smaller shadows,
too. darkfriends.
too late, rand muttered. he shifted the flute case to pull off his cloak and wrap it around her. it was
long enough to hide her white dress entirely, and trail on the ground besides. youll have to hold that up
to run, he told her. loial, if they wont let us in, we will have to find a way to sneak in.
but, rand  
would you rather wait for the trollocs? he gave loial a push to start him, and took selenes hand to
follow at a trot. find us a path that wont break our necks, loial.



youre letting yourself become flustered, selene said. she seemed to have less trouble following loial
in the failing light than rand did. seek the oneness, and be calm. one who would be great must always
be calm.
the trollocs might hear you, he told her. i dont want greatness. he thought he heard an irritated
grunt from her.
stones sometimes turned underfoot, but the way across the hills was not hard despite the twilight
shadows. trees, and even brush, had long since been cleared from the hills for firewood. nothing grew
except kneehigh grass that rustled softly around their legs. a night breeze came up softly. rand worried
that it might carry their scent to the trollocs.
loial stopped when they reached the wall; it stood twice as high as the ogier, the stones covered with a
whitish plaster. rand peered back toward the foregate. bands of lighted windows reached out like
spokes of a wheel from the city walls.
loial, he said softly, can you see them? are they following us?
the ogier looked in the direction of the foregate, and nodded unhappily. i only see some of the
trollocs, but they are coming this way. running. rand, i really dont think  
selene cut him off. if he wants to go in,alantin , he needs a door. such as that one. she pointed to a
dark patch a little down the wall. even with her telling him, rand was not certain it was a door, but when
she strode to it and pulled, it opened.
rand, loial began.
rand pushed him to the door. later, loial. and softly. were hiding, remember? he got them inside
and closed the door behind them. there were brackets for a bar, but no bar to be seen. it would not
stop anyone, but maybe the trollocs would hesitate to come inside the walls.
they were in an alleyway leading up the hill between two long, low windowless buildings. at first he
thought they were stone, too, but then he realized the white plaster had been laid over wood. it was dark
enough now for the moon reflecting from the walls to give a semblance of light.
better to be arrested by the illuminators than taken by trollocs, he murmured, starting up the hill.
but that is what i was trying to tell you, loial protested. ive heard the illuminators kill intruders. they
keep their secrets hard and fast, rand.
rand stopped dead and stared back at the door. the trollocs were still out there. at the worst, humans
had to be better to deal with than trollocs. he might be able to talk the illuminators into letting them go;
trollocs did not listen before they killed. im sorry i got you into this, selene.
danger adds a certain something, she said softly. and so far, you handle it well. shall we see what
we find? she brushed past him up the alleyway. rand followed, the spicy smell of her filling his nostrils.
atop the hill, the alleyway opened onto a wide expanse of smoothly flattened clay, almost as pale as the
plaster and nearly surrounded by more white, windowless buildings with the shadows of narrow alleys
between, but to rands right stood one building with windows, light falling onto the pale clay. he pulled
back into the shadows of the alley as a man and a woman appeared, walking slowly across the open



space.
their clothes were certainly not cairhienin. the man wore breeches as baggy as his shirt sleeves, both in
a soft yellow, with embroidery on the legs of his breeches and across the chest of his shirt. the womans
dress, worked elaborately across the breast, seemed a pale green, and her hair was done in a multitude
of short braids.
all is in readiness, you say? the woman demanded. you are certain, tammuz? all?
the man spread his hands. always you check behind me, aludra. all is in readiness. the display, it
could be given this very moment.
the gates and doors, they are all barred? all of the . . . ? her voice faded as they moved on to the far
end of the lighted building.
rand studied the open area, recognizing almost nothing. in the middle of it, several dozen upright tubes,
each nearly as tall as he and a foot or more across, sat on large wooden bases. from each tube, a dark,
twisted cord ran across the ground and behind a low wall, perhaps three paces long, on the far side. all
around the open space stood a welter of wooden racks with troughs and tubes and forked sticks and a
score of other things.
all the fireworks he had ever seen could be held in one hand, and that was as much as he knew, except
that they burst with a great roar, or whizzed along the ground in spirals of sparks, or sometimes shot into
the air. they always came with warnings from the illuminators that opening one could cause it to go off.
in any case, fireworks were too expensive for the village council to have allowed anybody unskilled to
open one. he could well remember the time when mat had tried to do just that; it was nearly a week
before anyone but mats own mother would speak to him. the only thing that rand found familiar at all
was the cords  the fuses. that, he knew, was where you set the fire.
with a glance back at the unbarred door, he motioned the others to follow and started around the tubes.
if they were going to find a place to hide, he wanted to be as far from that door as he could.
it meant making their way between the racks, and rand held his breath every time he brushed against
one. the things in them shifted with the slightest touch, rattling. all of them seemed to be made of wood,
without a piece of metal. he could imagine the racket if one were knocked over. he eyed the tall tubes
warily, remembering the bang made by one the size of his finger. if those were fireworks, he did not want
to be this close to them.
loial muttered to himself continually, especially when he bumped one of the racks, then started back so
fast that he bumped another. the ogier crept along in a cloud of clatters and muttering.
selene was no less unnerving. she strode as casually as if they were on a city street. she did not bump
anything, did not make a sound, but she also made no effort to keep the cloak closed. the white of her
dress seemed brighter than all the walls together. he peered at the lighted windows, waiting for someone
to appear. all it would take was one; selene could not fail to be seen, the alarm given.
the windows remained empty, though. rand was just breathing a sigh of relief as they approached the
low wall  and the alleys and buildings behind it  when loial brushed against another rack, standing
right beside the wall. it held ten softlooking sticks, as long as rands arm, with thin streams of smoke
rising from their tips. the rack made hardly a sound when it fell, the smoldering sticks sprawling across
one of the fuses. with a crackling hiss, the fuse burst into flame, and the flame raced toward one of the



tall tubes.
rand goggled for an instant, then he tried to whisper a shout. behind the wall!
selene made an angry noise when he bore her to the ground behind the wall, but he did not care. he
tried to spread himself over her protectively as loial crowded beside them. waiting for the tube to burst,
he wondered if there would be anything left of the wall. there was a hollow thump that he felt through the
ground as much as heard. cautiously, he lifted himself off of selene enough to peer around the edge of
the wall. she fisted him in the ribs, hard, and wriggled out from under him with an oath in a language he
did recognize, but he was beyond noticing.
a trickle of smoke was leaking from the top of one of the tubes. that was all. he shook his head
wonderingly.if thats all there is to it . . .
with a crash like thunder, a huge flower of red and white bloomed high in the now dark sky, then slowly
began drifting away in sparkles.
as he goggled at it, the lighted building erupted with noise. shouting men and women filled the windows,
staring and pointing.
rand longingly eyed the dark alleyway, only a dozen steps away. and the first step would be in full view
of the people at the windows. pounding feet poured from the building.
he pressed loial and selene back against the wall, hoping they looked like just another shadow. be
still and be silent, he whispered. its our only hope.
sometimes, selene said quietly, if you are very still, no one can see you at all. she did not sound the
least bit worried.
boots thumped back and forth on the other side of the wall, and voices were raised in anger. especially
the one rand recognized as aludra.
you great buffoon, tammuz! you great pig, you! your mother, she was a goat, tammuz! one day you
will kill us all.
i am not to blame for this, aludra, the man protested. i have been sure to put everything where it
belonged, and the punks, they were  
you will not speak to me, tammuz! a great pig does not deserve to speak like a human! aludras
voice changed in answer to another mans question. there is no time to prepare another. galldrian, he
must be satisfied with the rest for tonight. and one early. and you, tammuz! you will set everything
right, and tomorrow you will leave with the carts to buy the manure. does anything else go wrong this
night, i will not trust you again even with so much as the manure!
footsteps faded back toward the building to the accompaniment of aludras muttering. tammuz
remained, growling under his breath about the unfairness of it all.
rand stopped breathing as the man came over to right the toppled stand. pressed back in the shadows
against the wall, he could see tammuzs back and shoulder. all the man had to do was turn his head, and
he could not miss seeing rand and the others. still complaining to himself, tammuz arranged the
smoldering sticks in the stand, then stalked off toward the building where everyone else had gone.



letting his breath go, rand took a quick look after the man, then pulled back into the shadows. a few
people still stood at the windows. we cant expect any more luck tonight, he whispered.
it is said great men make their own luck, selene said softly.
will you stop that, he told her wearily. he wished the smell of her did not fill his head so; it made it
hard to think clearly. he could remember the feel of her body when he pushed her down  softness and
firmness in a disturbing blend  and that did not help either.
rand? loial was peering around the end of the wall away from the lighted building. i think we need
some more luck, rand.
rand shifted to look over the ogiers shoulder. beyond open space, in the alleyway that led to the
barless door, three trollocs were peering cautiously out of the shadows toward the lighted windows.
one woman was standing at a window; she did not seem to see the trollocs.
so, selene said quietly. it becomes a trap. these people may kill you if they take you. the trollocs
surely will. but perhaps you can slay the trollocs too quickly for them to make any outcry. perhaps you
can stop the people from killing you to preserve their little secrets. you may not want greatness, but it will
take a great man to do these things.
you dont have to sound happy about it, rand said. he tried to stop thinking about how she smelled,
how she felt, and the void almost surrounded him. he shook it away. the trollocs did not seem to have
located them, yet. he settled back, staring at the nearest dark alleyway. once they made a move toward
it, the trollocs would surely see, and so would the woman at the window. it would be a race as to
whether trollocs or illuminators reached them first.
your greatness will make me happy. despite the words, selene sounded angry. perhaps i should
leave you to find your own way for a time. if youll not take greatness when it is in your grasp, perhaps
you deserve to die.
rand refused to look at her. loial, can you see if theres another door down that alley?
the ogier shook his head. there is too much light here and too much dark there. if i were in the alley,
yes.
rand fingered the hilt of his sword. take selene. as soon as you see a door if you do  call out,
and ill follow. if there isnt a door at the end, you will have to lift her so she can reach the top of the wall
and climb over.
all right, rand. loial sounded worried. but when we move, those trollocs will come after us, no
matter who is watching. even if there is a door, they will be on our heels.
you let me worry about the trollocs.three of them. i might do it, with the void . the thought of
saidin decided him. too many strange things had happened when he let the male half of the true source
come close. i will follow as soon as i can. go. he turned to peer around the wall at the trollocs.
from the corner of his eye, he had an impression of loials bulk moving, of selenes white dress, half
covered by his cloak. one of the trollocs beyond the tubes pointed to them excitedly, but still the three
hesitated, glancing up at the window where the woman still watched.three of them. there has to be a



way. not the void. not saidin.
there is a door! came loials soft call. one of the trollocs took a step out of the shadows, and the
others followed, gathering themselves. as from a distance, rand heard the woman at the window cry
out, and loial shouted something.
without thinking, rand was on his feet. he had to stop the trollocs somehow, or they would run him
down, and loial and selene. he snatched one of the smoldering sticks and hurled himself at the nearest
tube. it tilted, started to fall over, and he caught the square wooden base; the tube pointed straight at the
trollocs. they slowed uncertainly  the woman at the window screamed  and rand touched the
smoking end of the stick to the fuse right where it joined the tube.
the hollow thump came immediately, and the thick wooden base slammed against him, knocking him
down. a roar like a thunderclap broke the night and a blinding burst of light tore away the dark.
blinking, rand staggered his feet, coughing in thick, acrid smoke, ears ringing. he stared in amazement.
half the tubes and all of the racks lay on their sides, and one corner of the building beside which the
trollocs had stood was simply gone, flames licking at ends of planks and rafters. of the trollocs there
was no sign.
through the ringing in his ears, rand heard shouts from the illuminators in the building. he broke into a
tottering run, lumbered into the alley. halfway down it he stumbled over something and realized it was his
cloak. he snatched it up without pausing. behind him, the cries of the illuminators filled the night.
loial was bouncing impatiently on his feet beside the open door. and he was alone.
where is selene? rand demanded.
she went back, rand. i tried to grab her, and she slipped right out of my hands.
rand turned back toward the noise. through the incessant sound in his ears, some of the shouts were
barely distinguishable. there was light there, now, from the flames.
the sand buckets! fetch the sand buckets quickly!
this is disaster! disaster!
some of them went that way!
loial grabbed rands shoulder. you cannot help her, rand. not by being taken yourself. we must
go. someone appeared at the end of the alley, a shadow outlined by the glow of flames behind, and
pointed toward them. come on, rand!
rand let himself be pulled out of the door into the darkness. the fire faded behind them until it was only
a glow in the night, and the lights of the foregate came closer. rand almost wished more trollocs would
appear, something he could fight. but there was only the night breeze ruffling the grass.
i tried to stop her, loial said. there was a long silence. we really couldnt have done anything. they
would just have taken us, too.
rand sighed. i know, loial. you did what you could. he walked backwards a few steps, staring at



the glow. it seemed less; the illuminators must be putting out the flames. i have to help her somehow.
how? saidin?the power? he shivered. i have to.
they went through the foregate by the lighted streets, wrapped in a silence that shut out the gaiety
around them.
when they entered the defender of the dragonwall, the innkeeper held out his tray with a sealed
parchment.
rand took it, and stared at the white seal. a crescent moon and stars. who left this? when?
an old woman, my lord. not a quarter of an hour gone. a servant, though she did not say from what
house. cuale smiled as if inviting confidences.
thank you, rand said, still staring at the seal. the innkeeper watched them go upstairs with a
thoughtful look.
hurin took his pipe out of his mouth when rand and loial entered the room. hurin had his short sword
and swordbreaker on the table, wiping them with an oily rag. you were long with the gleeman, my
lord. is he well?
rand gave a start. what? thom? yes, hes. . . he broke open the seal with his thumb and read.
when i think i know what you are going to do, you do something else. you are a dangerous man.
perhaps it will not he long before we are together again. think of the horn. think of the glory. and think
of me, for you are always mine.
again, it bore no signature but the flowing hand itself.
are all women crazy? rand demanded of the ceiling. hurin shrugged. rand threw himself into the
other chair, the one sized for an ogier; his feet dangled above the floor, but he did not care. he stared at
the blanketcovered chest under the edge of loials bed.think of the glory . i wish ingtar would
come.

chapter 28

a new thread in the pattern

perrin watched the mountains of kinslayers dagger uncomfortably as he rode. the way still slanted



upwards, and looked as if it would climb forever, though he thought the crest of the pass must not be too
much further. to one side of the trail, the land sloped sharply down to a shallow mountain stream,
dashing itself to froth over sharp rocks; to the other side the mountains reared in a series of jagged cliffs,
like frozen stone waterfalls. the trail itself ran through fields of boulders, some the size of a mans head,
and some as big as a cart. it would take no great skill to hide in that.
the wolves said there were people in the mountains. perrin wondered if they were some of fains
darkfriends. the wolves did not know, or care. they only knew the twisted ones were somewhere
ahead. still far ahead, though ingtar had pressed the column hard. perrin noticed that uno was watching
the mountains around them much the way he himself was.
mat, his bow slung across his back, rode with seeming unconcern, juggling three colored balls, yet he
looked paler than he had. verin examined him two and three times a day now, frowning, and perrin was
sure she had even tried healing at least once, but it made no difference perrin could see. in any case, she
seemed to be more absorbed in something about which she did not speak.
rand, perrin thought, looking at the aes sedais back. she always rode at the head of the column with
ingtar, and she always wanted them to move even faster than the shienaran lord would allow.somehow,
she knows about rand . images from the wolves flickered in his head  stone farmhouses and terraced
villages, all beyond the mountain peaks; the wolves saw them no differently than they saw hills or
meadows, except with a feeling that they were spoiled land. for a moment he found himself sharing that
regret, remembering places the twolegs had long since abandoned, remembering the swift rush through
the trees, and the hamstringing snap of his jaws as the deer tried to flee, and . . . with an effort he
pushed the wolves out of his head.these aes sedai are going to destroy all of us.
ingtar let his horse fall back beside perrins. sometimes, to perrins eyes, the crescent crest on the
shienarans helmet looked like a trollocs horns. ingtar said softly, tell me again what the wolves said.
ive told you ten times, perrin muttered.
tell me again! anything i may have missed, anything that will help me find the horn . . . ingtar drew a
breath and let it out slowly. i must find the horn of valere, perrin. tell me again.
there was no need for perrin to order it in his mind, not after so many repetitions. he droned it out.
someone  or something  attacked the darkfriends in the night and killed those trollocs we found.
his stomach no longer lurched at that. ravens and vultures were messy feeders. the wolves call him 
or it  shadowkiller; i think it was a man, but they wouldnt go close enough to see clearly. they are
not afraid of this shadowkiller; awe is more like it. they say the trollocs now follow shadowkiller. and
they say fain is with them  even after so long the remembered smell of fain, the feel of the man, made
his mouth twist  so the rest of the darkfriends must be, too.
shadowkiller, ingtar murmured. something of the dark one, like a myrddraal? i have seen things in
the blight that might be called shadowkillers, but . . . did they see nothing else?
they would not come close to him. it was not a fade. ive told you, they will kill a fade quicker than
they will a trolloc, even if they lose half the pack. ingtar, the wolves who saw it passed this to others,
then still others, before it reached me. i can only tell you what they passed on, and after so many tellings .
. . he let the words die as uno joined them.
aielman in the rocks, the oneeyed man said quietly.



this far from the waste? ingtar said incredulously. uno somehow managed to look offended without
changing his expression, and ingtar added, no, i dont doubt you. i am just surprised.
he flaming wanted me to see him, or i likely wouldnt have. uno sounded disgusted at admitting it.
and his bloody face wasnt veiled, so hes not out for killing. but when you see one bloody aiel, theres
always more you dont. suddenly his eye widened. burn me if it doesnt look like he bloody wants
more than to be seen. he pointed: a man had stepped into the way ahead of them.
instantly masemas lance dropped to a couch, and he dug his heels into his horse, leaping to a dead
gallop in three strides. he was not the only one; four steel points hurtled toward the man on the ground.
hold! ingtar shouted. hold, i said! ill have the ears of any man who doesnt stop where he stands!
masema pulled in his horse viciously, sawing the reins. the others also stopped, in a cloud of dust not
ten paces from the man, their lances still held steady on the mans chest. he raised a hand to wave away
the dust as it drifted toward him; it was the first move he had made.
he was a tall man, with skin dark from the sun and red hair cut short except for a tail in the back that
hung to his shoulders. from his soft, laced kneehigh boots to the cloth wrapped loosely around his neck,
his clothes were all in shades of brown and gray that would blend into rock or earth. the end of a short
horn bow peeked over his shoulder, and a quiver bristled with arrows at his belt at one side. a long knife
hung at the other. in his left hand he gripped a round hide buckler and three short spears, no more than
half as long as he was tall, with points fully as long as those of the shienaran lances.
i have no pipers to play the tune, the man announced with a smile, but if you wish the dance . . . he
did not change his stance, but perrin caught a sudden air of readiness. my name is urien, of the two
spires sept of the reyn aiel. i am a red shield. remember me.
ingtar dismounted and walked forward, removing his helmet. perrin hesitated only a moment before
climbing down to join him. he could not miss the chance to see an aiel close up. acting like a
blackveiled aiel. in story after story aiel were as deadly and dangerous as trollocs  some even said
they were all darkfriends  but uriens smile somehow did not look dangerous despite the fact that he
seemed poised to leap. his eyes were blue.
he looks like rand. perrin looked around to see that mat had joined them, too. maybe ingtars
right, matt added quietly. maybe rand is an aiel.
perrin nodded. but it doesnt change anything.
no, it doesnt. mat sounded as if he were talking about something beside what perrin meant.
we are both far from our homes, ingtar said to the aiel, and we, at least, have come for other things
than fighting. perrin revised his opinion of uriens smile; the man actually looked disappointed.
as you wish it, shienaran. urien turned to verin, just getting down off her horse, and made an odd
bow, digging the points of his spears into the ground and extending his right hand, palm up. his voice
became respectful. wise one, my water is yours.
verin handed her reins to one of the soldiers. she studied the aiel as she came closer. why do you call
me that? do you take me for an aiel?



no, wise one. but you have the look of those who have made the journey to rhuidean and survived.
the years do not touch the wise ones in the same way as other women, or as they touch men.
an excited look appeared on the aes sedais face, but ingtar spoke impatiently. we are following
darkfriends and trollocs, urien. have you seen any sign of them?
trollocs? here? uriens eyes brightened. it is one of the signs the prophecies speak of. when the
trollocs come out of the blight again, we will leave the threefold land and take back our places of
old. there was muttering from the mounted shienarans. urien eyed them with a pride that made him
seem to be looking down from a height.
the threefold land? mat said.
perrin thought he looked still paler; not sick, exactly, but as if he had been out of the sun too long.
you call it the waste, urien said. to us it is the threefold land. a shaping stone, to make, us; a
testing ground, to prove our worth; and a punishment for the sin.
what sin? mat asked. perrin caught his breath, waiting for the spears in uriens hand to flash.
the aiel shrugged. so long ago it was, that none remember. except the wise ones and the clan chiefs,
and they will not speak of it. it must have been a very great sin if they cannot bring themselves to tell us,
but the creator punishes us well.
trollocs, ingtar persisted. have you seen trollocs?
urien shook his head. i would have killed them if i had, but i have seen nothing but the rocks and the
sky.
ingtar shook his head, losing interest, but verin spoke, sharp concentration in her voice. this rhuidean.
what is it? where is it? how are the girls chosen to go?
uriens face went flat, his eyes hooded. i cannot speak of it, wise one.
in spite of himself perrins hand gripped his axe. there was that in uriens voice. ingtar had also set
himself, ready to reach for his sword, and there was a stir among the mounted men. but verin stepped
up to the aiel, until she was almost touching his chest, and looked up into his face.
i am not a wise one as you know them, urien, she said insistently. i am aes sedai. tell me what
you can say of rhuidean.
the man who had been ready to face twenty men now looked as if he wished for an escape from this
one plump woman with graying hair. i . . . can tell you only what is known to all. rhuidean lies in the
lands of the jenn aiel, the thirteenth clan. i cannot speak of them except to name them. none may go
there save women who wish to become wise ones, or men who wish to be clan chiefs. perhaps the jenn
aiel choose among them; i do not know. many go; few return, and those are marked as what they are
 wise ones, or clan chiefs. no more can i say, aes sedai. no more.
verin continued to look up at him, pursing her lips.
urien looked at the sky as though he was trying to remember it. will you slay me now, aes sedai?



she blinked. what?
will you slay me now? one of the old prophecies says that if ever we fail the aes sedai again, they will
slay us. i know your power is greater than that of the wise ones. the aiel laughed suddenly,
mirthlessly. there was a wild light in his eyes. bring your lightnings, aes sedai. i will dance with them.
the aiel thought he was going to die, and he was not afraid. perrin realized his mouth was open and
closed it with a snap.
what would i not give, verin murmured, gazing up at urien, to have you in the white tower. or just
willing to talk. oh, be still, man. i wont harm you. unless you mean to harm me, with your talk of
dancing.
urien seemed astounded. he looked at the shienarans, sitting their horses all around, as if he suspected
some trick. you are not a maiden of the spear, he said slowly. how could i strike at a woman who
has not wedded the spear? it is forbidden except to save life, and then i would take wounds to avoid it.
why are you here, so far from your own lands? she asked. why did you come to us? you could
have remained in the rocks, and we would never have known you were there. the aiel hesitated, and
she added, tell only what you are willing to say. i do not know what your wise ones do, but ill not
harm you, or try to force you.
so the wise ones say, urien said dryly, yet even a clan chief must have a strong belly to avoid doing
as they want. he seemed to be picking his words carefully. i search for . . . someone. a man. his eye
ran across perrin, mat, the shienarans, dismissing them all. he who comes with the dawn. it is said
there will be great signs and portents of his coming. i saw that you were from shienar by your escorts
armor, and you had the look of a wise one, so i thought you might have word of great events, the
events that might herald him.
a man? verins voice was soft, but her eyes were as sharp as daggers. what are these signs?
urien shook his head. it is said we will know them when we hear of them, as we will know him when
we see him, for he will be marked. he will come from the west, beyond the spine of the world, but be
of our blood. he will go to rhuidean, and lead us out of the threefold land. he took a spear in his
right hand. leather and metal creaked as soldiers reached for their swords, and perrin realized he had
taken hold of his axe again, but verin waved them all to stillness with an irritated look. in the dirt urien
scraped a circle with his spearpoint, then drew across it a sinuous line. it is said that under this sign, he
will conquer.
ingtar frowned at the symbol, no recognition on his face, but mat muttered something coarsely under his
breath, and perrin felt his mouth go dry.the ancient symbol of the aes sedai.
verin scraped the marking away with her foot. i cannot tell you where he is, urien, she said, and i
have heard of no signs or portents to guide you to him.
then i will continue my search. it was not a question, yet urien waited until she nodded before he
eyed the shienarans proudly, challengingly, then turned his back on them. he walked away smoothly,
and vanished into the rocks without looking back.
some of the soldiers began muttering. uno said something about crazy bloody aiel, and masema



growled that they should have left the aiel for the ravens.
we have wasted valuable time, ingtar announced loudly. we will ride harder to make it up.
yes, verin said, we must ride harder.
ingtar glanced at her, but the aes sedai was staring at the smudged ground, where her foot had
obliterated the symbol. dismount, he ordered. armor on the packhorses. were inside cairhien, now.
we do not want the cairhienin thinking we have come to fight them. be quick about it!
mat leaned close to perrin. do you . . . ? do you think he was talking about rand? its crazy, i know,
but even ingtar thinks hes aiel.
i dont know, perrin said. everything has been crazy since we got mixed up with aes sedai.
softly, as to herself, verin spoke, still staring at the ground. it must be a part, and yet how? does the
wheel of time weave threads into the pattern of which we know nothing? or does the dark one touch
the pattern again?
perrin felt a chill.
verin looked up at the soldiers removing their armor. hurry! she commanded with more snap than
ingtar and uno combined. we must hurry!

chapter 29

seanchan

geofram bornhald ignored the smell of burning houses and the bodies that lay sprawled on the dirt of the
street. byar and a whitecloaked guard of a hundred rode into the village at his heels, half the men he had
with him. his legion was too scattered for his liking, with questioners having too many of the commands,
but his orders had been explicit: obey the questioners.
there had been but slight resistance here; only half a dozen dwellings gave off columns of smoke. the
inn was still standing, he saw, whiteplastered stone like almost every structure on almoth plain.
reining up before the inn, his eyes went past the prisoners his soldiers held near the village well to the
long gibbet marring the village green. it was hastily made, only a long pole on uprights, but it held thirty
bodies, their clothes ruffled by the breeze. there were small bodies hanging among their elders. even



byar stared at that in disbelief.
muadh! he roared. a grizzled man trotted away from those holding the prisoners. muadh had fallen
into the hands of darkfriends, once; his scarred face took even the strongest aback. is this your work,
muadh, or the seanchan?
neither, my lord captain. muadhs voice was a hoarse, whispered growl, another leaving of the
darkfriends. he said no more.
bornhald frowned. surely that lot did not do it, he said, gesturing to the prisoners. the children did
not look so neat as when he had brought them across tarabon, but they seemed ready to parade
compared with the rabble that crouched under their watchful eyes. men in rags and bits of armor, with
sullen faces. remnants of the army tarabon had sent against the invaders on toman head.
muadh hesitated, then said carefully, the villagers say they wore taraboner cloaks, my lord captain.
there was a big man among them, with gray eyes and a long mustache, that sounds twin to child earwin,
and a young lad, trying to hide a pretty face behind a yellow beard, who fought with his left hand. sounds
almost like child wuan, my lord captain.
questioners! bornhald spat. earwin and wuan were among those he had had to hand over to the
questioners command. he had seen questioner tactics before, but this was the first time he had ever
been faced with childrens bodies.
if my lord captain says so. muadh made it sound like fervent agreement.
cut them down, bornhald said wearily. cut them down, and make sure the villagers know there will
be no more killing.unless some fool decides to be brave because his woman is watching, and i
have to make an example . he dismounted, eyeing the prisoners again, as muadh hurried off calling for
ladders and knives. he had more to think about than questioners overzealousness; he wished he could
stop thinking about questioners altogether.
they do not put up much fight, my lord captain, byar said, either these taraboners or what is left of
the domani. they snap like cornered rats, but run as soon as anything snaps back.
let us see how we do against the invaders, byar, before we look down on these men, yes? the
prisoners faces bore a defeated look that had been there before his men came. have muadh pick one
out for me. muadhs face was enough to soften most mens resolve by itself. an officer, preferably.
one who looks intelligent enough to tell what he has seen without embroidery, but young enough not to
have yet grown a full backbone. tell muadh to be not too gentle about it, yes? make the fellow believe
that i mean to see worse happen to him than he ever dreamed of, unless he convinces me otherwise. he
tossed his reins to one of the children and strode into the inn.
the innkeeper was there, for a wonder, an obsequious, sweating man, his dirty shirt straining over his
belly until the embroidered red scrollwork seemed ready to pop off. bornhald waved the man away; he
was vaguely aware of a woman and some children huddling in a doorway, until the fat innkeeper
shepherded them out.
bornhald pulled off his gauntlets and sat at one of the tables. he knew too little about the invaders, the
strangers. that was what almost everyone called them, those who did not just babble about artur
hawkwing. he knew they called themselves the seanchan, andhailene . he had enough of the old
tongue to know the latter meant those who come before, or the forerunners. they also called



themselvesrhyagelle , those who come home, and spoke ofcorenne , the return. it was almost
enough to make him believe the tales of artur hawkwings armies come back. no one knew where the
seanchan had come from, other than that they had landed in ships. bornhalds requests for information
from the sea folk had been met with silence. amador did not hold the athaan miere in good favor, and
the attitude was returned with interest. all he knew of the seanchan he had heard from men like those
outside. broken, beaten rabble who spoke, wideeyed and sweating, of men who came into battle riding
monsters as often as horses, who fought with monsters by their sides, and brought aes sedai to rend the
earth under their enemies feet.
a sound of boots in the doorway made him put on a wolfish grin, but byar was not accompanied by
muadh. the child of the light who stood beside him, back braced and helmet in the crook of his arm,
was jeral, who bornhald expected to be a hundred miles away. over his armor, the young man wore a
cloak of domani cut, trimmed with blue, not the white cloak of the children.
muadh is talking to a young fellow now, my lord captain, byar said. child jeral has just ridden in
with a message.
bornhald waved for jeral to begin.
the young man did not unbend. the compliments of jaichim carridin, he started, looking straight
ahead, who guides the hand of the light in  
i have no need of the questioners compliments, bornhald growled, and saw the young mans startled
look. jeral was young, yet. for that matter, byar looked uncomfortable, as well. you will give me his
message, yes? not word for word, unless i ask it. simply tell me what he wants.
the child, set to recite, swallowed before he began. my lord captain, he  he says you are moving
too many men too close to toman head. he says the darkfriends on almoth plain must be rooted out,
and you are  forgive me, lord captain  you are to turn back at once and ride toward the heart of
the plain. he stood stiffly, waiting.
bornhald studied him. the dust of the plain stained jerals face as well as his cloak and his boots. go
and get yourself something to eat, bornhald told him. there should be wash water in one of these
houses, if you wish it. return to me in an hour. i will have messages for you to carry. he waved the
young man out.
the questioners may be right, my lord captain, byar said when jeral was gone. there are many
villages scattered on the plain, and the darkfriends  
bornhalds hand slapping the table cut him off. what darkfriends? i have seen nothing in any village he
has ordered taken except farmers and craftsmen worried that we will burn their livelihoods, and a few old
women who tend the sick. byars face was a study in lack of expression; he was always readier than
bornhald to see darkfriends. and children, byar? do children here become darkfriends?
the sins of the mother are visited to the fifth generation, byar quoted, and the sins of the father to the
tenth. but he looked uneasy. even byar had never killed a child.
has it never occurred to you, byar, to wonder why carridin has taken away our banners, and the
cloaks of the men the questioners lead? even the questioners themselves have put off the white. this
suggests something, yes?



he must have his reasons, lord captain, byar said slowly. the questioners always have reasons,
even when they do not tell the rest of us.
bornhald reminded himself that byar was a good soldier. children to the north wear taraboner cloaks,
byar, and those to the south domani. i do not like what this suggests to me. there are darkfriends here,
but they are in falme, not on the plain. when jeral rides, he will not ride alone. messages will go to every
group of the children i know how to find. i mean to take the legion onto toman head, byar, and see
what the true darkfriends, these seanchan, are up to.
byar looked troubled, but before he could speak, muadh appeared with one of the prisoners. the
sweating young man in a battered, ornate breastplate shot frightened looks at muadhs hideous face.
bornhald drew his dagger and began trimming his nails. he had never understood why that made some
men nervous, but he used it just the same. even his grandfatherly smile made the prisoners dirty face
pale. now, young man, you will tell me everything you know about these strangers, yes? if you need to
think on what to say, i will send you back out with child muadh to consider it.
the prisoner darted a wideeyed look at muadh. then words began to pour out of him.

the long swells of the aryth ocean madespray roll, but domons spread feet balanced him as he held
the long tube of the looking glass to his eye and studied the large vessel that pursued them. pursued, and
was slowly overtaking. the wind wherespray ran was not the best or the strongest, but where the other
ship smashed the swells into mountains of foam with its bluff bow, it could not have blown better. the
coastline of toman head loomed to the east, dark cliffs and narrow strips of sand. he had not cared to
takespray too far out, and now he feared he might pay for it.
strangers, captain? yarin had the sound of sweat in his voice. is it a strangers ship?
domon lowered the looking glass, but his eye still seemed filled by that tall, squarelooking ship with its
odd ribbed sails. seanchan, he said, and heard yarin groan. he drummed his thick fingers on the rail,
then told the helmsman, take her closer in. that ship will no dare enter the shallow watersspray can
sail.
yarin shouted commands, and crewmen ran to haul in booms as the helmsman put the tiller over,
pointing the bow more toward the shoreline.spray moved more slowly, heading so far into the wind, but
domon was sure he could reach shoal waters before the other vessel came up on him.did her holds be
full, she could still take shallower water than ever that great hull can.
his ship rode a little higher in the water than she had on sailing from tanchico. a third of the cargo of
fireworks he had taken on there was gone, sold in the fishing villages on toman head, but with the silver
that flowed for the fireworks had come disturbing reports. the people spoke of visits from the tall, boxy
ships of the invaders. when seanchan ships anchored off the coast, the villagers who drew up to defend
their homes were rent by lightning from the sky while small boats were still ferrying the invaders ashore,
and the earth erupted in fire under their feet. domon had thought he was hearing nonsense until he was
shown the blackened ground, and he had seen it in too many villages to doubt any longer. monsters
fought beside the seanchan soldiers, not that there was ever much resistance left, the villagers said, and
some even claimed that the seanchan themselves were monsters, with heads like huge insects.
in tanchico, no one had even known what they called themselves, and the taraboners spoke



confidently of their soldiers driving the invaders into the sea. but in every coastal town, it was different.
the seanchan told astonished people they must swear again oaths they had forsaken, though never
deigning to explain when they had forsaken them, or what the oaths meant. the young women were
taken away one by one to be examined, and some were carried aboard the ships and never seen again.
a few older women had also vanished, some of the guides and healers. new mayors were chosen by
the seanchan, and new councils, and any who protested the disappearances of the women or having no
voice in the choosing might be hung, or burst suddenly into flame, or be brushed aside like yapping dogs.
there was no way of telling which it would be until it was too late.
and when the people had been thoroughly cowed, when they had been made to kneel and swear,
bewildered, to obey the forerunners, await the return, and serve those who come home with their
lives, the seanchan sailed away and usually never returned. falme, it was said, was the only town they
held fast.
in some of the villages they had left, men and women crept back toward their former lives, to the extent
of talking about electing their councils again, but most eyed the sea nervously and made palecheeked
protests that they meant to hold to the oaths they had been made to swear even if they did not
understand them.
domon had no intention of meeting any seanchan, if he could avoid it.
he was raising the glass to see what he could make out on the nearing seanchan decks, when, with a
roar, the surface of the sea broke into fountaining water and flame not a hundred paces from his larboard
side. before he had even begun to gape, another column of flame split the sea on the other side, and as
he was spinning to stare at that, another burst up ahead. the eruptions died as quickly as they were born,
spray from them blown across the deck. where they had been, the sea bubbled and steamed as if
boiling.
we . . . well reach shallow water before they can close with us, yarin said slowly. he seemed to be
trying not to look at the water roiling under clouds of mist.
domon shook his head. whatever they did, they can shatter us, even do i take her into the breakers.
he shivered, thinking of the flame inside the fountains of water, and his holds full of fireworks. fortune
prick me, we might no live to drown. he tugged at his beard and rubbed his bare upper lip, reluctant to
give the order  the vessel and what it contained were all he had in the world  but finally he made
himself speak. bring her into the wind, yarin, and down sail. quickly, man, quickly! before they do
think we still try to escape.
as crewmen ran to lower the triangular sails, domon turned to watch the seanchan ship approach.
spray lost headway and pitched in the swells. the other vessel stood taller above the water than
domons ship, with wooden towers at bow and stern. men were in the rigging, raising those strange sails,
and armored figures stood atop the towers. a longboat was put over the side, and sped towardspray
under ten oars. it carried armored shapes, and  domon frowned in surprise  two women crouched
in the stern. the longboat thumped againstspray s hull.
the first to climb up was one of the armored men, and domon saw immediately why some of the
villagers claimed the seanchan themselves were monsters. the helmet looked very much like some
monstrous insects head, with thin red plumes like feelers; the wearer seemed to be peering out through
mandibles. it was painted and gilded to increase the effect, and the rest of the mans armor was also
worked with paint and gold. overlapping plates in black and red outlined with gold covered his chest and
ran down the outsides of his arms and the fronts of his thighs. even the steel backs of his gauntlets were



red and gold. where he did not wear metal, his clothes were dark leather. the twohanded sword on his
back, with its curved blade, was scabbarded and hilted in blackandred leather.
then the armored figure removed his helmet, and domon stared. he was a woman. her dark hair was
cut short, and her face was hard, but there was no mistaking it. he had never heard of such a thing,
except among the aiel, and aiel were well known to be crazed. just as disconcerting was the fact that
her face did not look as different as he had expected of a seanchan. her eyes were blue, it was true, and
her skin exceedingly fair, but he had seen both before. if this woman wore a dress, no one would look at
her twice. he eyed her and revised his opinion, that cold stare and those hard cheeks would make her
remarked anywhere.
the other soldiers followed the woman onto the deck. domon was relieved to see, when some of them
removed their strange helmets, that they, at least, were men; men with black eyes, or brown, who could
have gone unnoticed in tanchico or illian. he had begun to have visions of armies of blueeyed women
with swords.aes sedai with swords , he thought, remembering the sea erupting.
the seanchan woman surveyed the ship arrogantly, then picked domon out as captain  it had to be
him or yarin, by their clothes; the way yarin had his eyes closed and was muttering prayers under his
breath pointed to domon  and fixed him with a stare like a spike.
are there any women among your crew or passengers? she spoke with a soft slurring that made her
hard to understand, but there was a snap in her voice that said she was used to getting answers. speak
up, man, if you are the captain. if not, wake that other fool and tell him to speak.
i do be captain, my lady, domon said cautiously. he had no idea how to address her, and he did not
want to put a foot wrong. i have no passengers, and there be no women in my crew. he thought of the
girls and women who had been carried off, and, not for the first time, wondered what these folk wanted
with them.
the two women dressed as women were coming up from the longboat, one drawing the other 
domon blinked  by a leash of silvery metal as she climbed aboard. the leash went from a bracelet
worn by the first woman to a collar around the neck of the second. he could not tell whether it was
woven or jointed  it seemed somehow to be both  but it was clearly of a piece with both bracelet
and collar. the first woman gathered the leash in coils as the other came onto the deck. the collared
woman wore plain dark gray and stood with her hands folded and her eyes on the planks under her feet.
the other had red panels bearing forked, silver lightning bolts on the breast of her blue dress and on the
sides of her skirts, which ended short of the ankles of her boots. domon eyed the women uneasily.
speak slowly, man, the blueeyed woman demanded in her slurred speech. she came across the deck
to confront him, staring up at him and in some way seeming taller and larger than he. you are even
harder to understand than the rest in this lightforsaken land. and i make no claim to be of the blood.
not yet. aftercorenne . . . i am captain egeanin.
domon repeated himself, trying to speak slowly, and added, i do be a peaceful trader, captain. i mean
no harm to you, and i have no part in your war. he could not help eyeing the two women connected by
the leash again.
a peaceful trader? egeanin mused. in that case, you will be free to go once you have sworn fealty
again. she noticed his glances and turned to smile at the women with the pride of ownership. you
admire mydamane ? she cost me dear, but she was worth every coin. few but nobles own adamane ,
and most are property of the throne. she is strong, trader. she could have broken your ship to splinters,



had i wished it so.
domon stared at the women and the silver leash. he had connected the one wearing the lightning with
the fiery fountains in the sea, and assumed she was an aes sedai. egeanin had just set his head whirling.
no one could do that to . . . she is aes sedai? he said disbelievingly.
he never saw the casual backhand blow coming. he staggered as her steelbacked gauntlet split his lip.
that name is never spoken, egeanin said with a dangerous softness. there are only thedamane , the
leashed ones, and now they serve in truth as well as name. her eyes made ice seem warm.
domon swallowed blood and kept his hand clenched at his sides. if he had had a sword to hand, he
would not have led his crew to slaughter against a dozen armored soldiers, but it was an effort to make
his voice humble. i meant no disrespect, captain. i know nothing of you or your ways. if i do offend, it
is ignorance, no intention.
she looked at him, then said, you are all ignorant, captain, but you will pay the debt of your
forefathers. this land was ours, and it will be ours again. with the return, it will be ours again. domon
did not know what to say surely she can no mean that nattering about artur hawkwing be true?
 so he kept his mouth shut. you will sail your vessel to falme  he tried to protest, but her glare
silenced him  where you and your ship will be examined. if you are no more than a peaceful trader, as
you claim, you will be allowed to go your way when you have sworn the oaths.
oaths, captain? what oaths?
to obey, to await, and to serve. your ancestors should have remembered.
she gathered her people  except for a single man in plain armor, which marked him of low rank as
much as the depth of his bow to captain egeanin  and their longboat pulled away toward the larger
ship. the remaining seanchan gave no orders, only sat crosslegged on the deck and began sharpening
his sword while the crew put sail on and got under way. he seemed to have no fear at being alone, and
domon would have personally thrown overboard any crewman who raised a hand to him, for asspray
made her way along the coast, the seanchan ship followed, out in deeper water. there was a mile
between the two vessels, but domon knew there was no hope of escape, and he meant to deliver the
man back to captain egeanin as safely as if he had been cradled in his mothers arms.
it was a long passage to falme, and domon finally persuaded the seanchan to talk, a little. a darkeyed
man in his middle years, with an old scar above his eyes and another nicking his chin, his name was
caban, and he had nothing but contempt for anyone this side of the aryth ocean. that gave domon a
moments pause.maybe they truly do be . . .no, that do be madness . cabans speech had the same
slur as egeanins, but where hers was silk sliding across iron, his was leather rasping on rock, and mostly
he wanted to talk about battles, drinking, and women he had known. half the time, domon was not
certain if he were speaking of here and now, or of wherever he had come from. the man was certainly
not forthcoming about anything domon wanted to know.
once domon asked about thedamane . caban reached up from where he sat in front of the helmsman
and put the point of his sword to domons throat. watch what your tongue touches, or you will lose it.
thats the business of the blood, not your kind. or mine. he grinned while he said it, and as soon as he
was done, he went back to sliding a stone along his heavy, curved blade.
domon touched the point of blood welling above his collar and resolved not to ask that again, at least.



the closer the two vessels came to falme, the more of the tall, squarelooking seanchan ships they
passed, some under sail, but more anchored. every one was bluffbowed and towered, as big as
anything domon had ever seen, even among the sea folk. a few local craft, he saw, with their sharp
bows and slanted sails, darted across the green swells. the sight gave him confidence that egeanin had
spoken the truth about letting him go free.
whenspray came up on the headland where falme stood, domon gaped at the numbers of the
seanchan ships anchored off the harbor. he tried counting them and gave up at a hundred, less than
halfway done. he had seen as many ships in one place before  in illian, and tear, and even tanchico
 but those vessels had included many smaller craft. muttering glumly to himself, he tookspray into the
harbor, shepherded by her great seanchan watchdog.
falme stood on a spit of land at the very tip of toman head, with nothing further west of it except the
aryth ocean. high cliffs ran to the harbor mouth on both sides, and atop one of those, where every ship
running into the harbor had to pass under them, stood the towers of the watchers over the waves. a
cage hung over the side of one of the towers, with a man sitting in it despondently, legs dangling through
the bars.
who is that? domon asked.
caban had finally given over sharpening his sword, after domon had begun to wonder if he meant to
shave with it. the seanchan glanced up to where domon pointed. oh. that is the first watcher. not
the one who sat in the chair when we first came, of course. every time he dies, they choose another, and
we put him in the cage.
but why? domon demanded.
cabans grin showed too many teeth. they watched for the wrong thing, and forgot when they should
have been remembering.
domon tore his eyes away from the seanchan.spray slid down the last real sea swell and into the
quieter waters of the harbor.i do be a trader, and it is none of my business.
falme rose from stone docks up the slopes of the hollow that made the harbor. domon could not decide
whether the dark stone houses made up a goodly sized town or a small city. certainly he saw no building
in it to rival the smallest palace in illian.
he guidedspray to a place at one of the docks, and wondered, while the crew tied the ship fast, if the
seanchan might buy some of the fireworks in his hold.none of my business.
to his surprise, egeanin had herself rowed to the dock with herdamane . there was another woman
wearing the bracelet this time, with the red panels and forked lightning on her dress, but thedamane was
the same sadfaced woman who never looked up unless the other spoke to her. egeanin had domon and
his crew herded off the ship to sit on the dock under the eyes of a pair of her soldiers  she seemed to
think no more were needed, and domon was not about to argue with her  while others searchedspray
under her direction. thedamane was part of the search.
down the dock, a thing appeared. domon could think of no other way to describe it. a hulking creature
with a leathery, graygreen hide and a beak of a mouth in a wedgeshaped head. and three eyes. it
lumbered along beside a man whose armor bore three painted eyes, just like those of the creature. the



local people, dockmen and sailors in roughly embroidered shirts and long vests to their knees, shied
away as the pair passed, but no seanchan gave them a second glance. the man with the beast seemed to
be directing it with hand signals.
man and creature turned in among the buildings, leaving domon staring and his crew muttering to
themselves. the two seanchan guards sneered at them silently.no my business , domon reminded
himself. his business was his ship.
the air had a familiar smell of salt water and pitch. he shifted uneasily on the stone, hot from the sun,
and wondered what the seanchan were searching for. what thedamane was searching for. wondered
what that thing had been. gulls cried, wheeling above the harbor. he thought of the sounds a caged man
might make.it is no my business.
eventually egeanin led the others back onto the dock. the seanchan captain had something wrapped in
a piece of yellow silk, domon noted warily. something small enough to carry in one hand, but which she
held carefully in both.
he got to his feet  slowly, for the soldiers sake, though their eyes held the same contempt cabans
did. you see, captain? i do be only a peaceful trader. perhaps your people would care to buy some
fireworks?
perhaps, trader. there was an air of suppressed excitement about her that made him uneasy, and her
next words increased the feeling. you will come with me.
she told two soldiers to come along, and one of them gave domon a push to get him started. it was not
a rough shove; domon had seen farmers push a cow in the same way to make it move. setting his teeth,
he followed egeanin.
the cobblestone street climbed the slope, leaving the smell of the harbor behind. the slateroofed
houses grew larger and taller as the street climbed. surprisingly for a town held by invaders, the streets
held more local people than seanchan soldiers, and now and again a curtained palanquin was borne past
by barechested men. the falmen seemed to be going about their business as if the seanchan were not
there. or almost not there. when palanquin or soldier passed, both poor folk, with only a curling line or
two worked on their dirty clothes, and the richer, with shirts, vests, and dresses covered from shoulder to
waist in intricately embroidered patterns, bowed and remained bent until the seanchan were gone. they
did the same for domon and his guard. neither egeanin nor her soldiers so much as glanced at them.
domon realized with a sudden shock that some of the local people they passed wore daggers at their
belts, and in a few cases swords. he was so surprised that he spoke without thinking. some of them be
on your side?
egeanin frowned over her shoulder at him, obviously puzzled. without slowing, she looked at the people
and nodded to herself. you mean the swords. they are our people, now, trader; they have sworn the
oaths. she stopped abruptly, pointing at a tall, heavyshouldered man with a heavily embroidered vest
and a sword swinging on a plain leather baldric. you.
the man halted in midstep, one foot in the air and a frightened look suddenly on his face. it was a hard
face, but he looked as if he wanted to run. instead, he turned to her and bowed, hands on knees, eyes
fixed on her boots. how may this one serve the captain? he asked in a tight voice.
you are a merchant? egeanin said. you have sworn the oaths?



yes, captain. yes. he did not take his eyes from her feet.
what do you tell the people when you take your wagons inland?
that they must obey the forerunners, captain, await the return, and serve those who come home.
and do you never think to use that sword against us?
the mans hands went whiteknuckled gripping his knees, and there was suddenly sweat in his voice. i
have sworn the oaths, captain. i obey, await, and serve.
you see? egeanin said, turning to domon. there is no reason to forbid them weapons. there must be
trade, and merchants must protect themselves from bandits. we allow the people to come and go as they
will, so long as they obey, await, and serve. their forefathers broke their oaths, but these have learned
better. she started back up the hill, and the soldiers pushed domon after her.
he looked back at the merchant. the man stayed bent as he was till egeanin was ten paces up the
street, then he straightened and hurried the other way, leaping down the sloping street.
egeanin and his guards did not look around, either, when a mounted seanchan troop passed them,
climbing the street. the soldiers rode creatures that looked almost like cats the size of horses, but with
lizards scales rippling bronze beneath their saddles. clawed feet grasped the cobblestones. a
threeeyed head turned to regard domon as the troop climbed by; aside from everything else, it seemed
too  knowing  for domons peace of mind. he stumbled and almost fell. all along the street, the
falmen were pressing themselves back against the fronts of the buildings, some closing their eyes. the
seanchan paid them no heed.
domon understood why the seanchan could allow the people as much freedom as they did. he
wondered if he would have had nerve enough to resist.damane . monsters. he wondered if there was
anything to stop the seanchan from marching all the way to the spine of the world.no my business , he
reminded himself roughly, and considered whether there was any way to avoid the seanchan in his future
trading.
they reached the top of the incline, where the town gave way to hills. there was no town wall. ahead
were the inns that served merchants who traded inland, and wagon yards and stables. here, the houses
would have made respectable manors for the minor lords in illian. the largest of them had an honor
guard of seanchan soldiers out front, and a blueedged banner bearing a golden, spreadwinged hawk
rippling above it. egeanin surrendered her sword and dagger before taking domon inside. her two
soldiers remained in the street. domon began to sweat. he smelled a lord in this; it was never good to do
business with a lord on the lords own ground.
in the front hall egeanin left domon at the door and spoke to a servant. a local man, judging by the full
sleeves of his shirt and the spirals embroidered across his chest; domon believed he caught the words
high lord. the servant hurried away, returning finally to lead them to what was surely the largest room
in the house. every stick of furniture had been cleared out of it, even the rugs, and the stone floor was
polished to a bright gleam. folding screens painted with strange birds hid walls and windows.
egeanin stopped just inside the room. when domon tried to ask where they were and why, she silenced
him with a savage glare and a wordless growl. she did not move, but she seemed on the point of
bouncing on her toes. she held whatever it was she had taken from his ship as if it were precious. he



tried to imagine what it could be.
suddenly a gong sounded softly, and the seanchan woman dropped to her knees, setting the
silkwrapped something carefully beside her. at a look from her, domon got down as well. lords had
strange ways, and he suspected seanchan lords might have stranger ones than he knew.
two men appeared in the doorway at the far end of the room. one had the left side of his scalp shaved,
his remaining pale golden hair braided and hanging down over his ear to his shoulder. his deep yellow
robe was just long enough to let the toes of yellow slippers peek out when he walked. the other wore a
blue silk robe, brocaded with birds and long enough to trail nearly a span on the floor behind him. his
head was shaved bald, and his fingernails were at least an inch long, those on the first two fingers of each
hand lacquered blue. domons mouth dropped open.
you are in the presence of the high lord turak, the yellowhaired man intoned, who leads those
who come before, and succors the return.
egeanin prostrated herself with her hands at her sides. domon imitated her with alacrity.even the high
lords of tear would no demand this , he thought. out of the corner of his eye, he saw egeanin kissing
the floor. with a grimace, he decided there was a limit to imitation.they can no see whether i do or no
anyway.
egeanin suddenly stood. he started to rise as well, and made it as far as one knee before a growl in her
throat and a scandalized look on the face of the man with the braid put him back down, face to the floor
and muttering under his breath.i would no do this for the king of illian and the council of nine
together.
your name is egeanin? it had to be the voice of the man in the blue robe. his slurring speech had a
rhythm almost like singing.
i was so named on my swordday, high lord, she replied humbly.
this is a fine specimen, egeanin. quite rare. do you wish a payment?
that the high lord is pleased is payment enough. i live to serve, high lord.
i will mention your name to the empress, egeanin. after the return, new names will be called to the
blood. show yourself fit, and you may shed the name egeanin for a higher.
the high lord honors me.
yes. you may leave me.
domon could see nothing but her boots backing out of the room, pausing at intervals for bows. the
door closed behind her. there was a long silence. he was watching sweat from his forehead drip onto
the floor when turak spoke again.
you may rise, trader.
domon got to his feet, and saw what turak held in his longnailed fingers. thecuendillar disk shaped
into the ancient seal of the aes sedai. remembering egeanins reaction when he mentioned aes sedai,
domon began to sweat in earnest. there was no animosity in the high lords dark eyes, only a slight



curiosity, but domon did not trust lords.
do you know what this is, trader?
no, high lord. domons reply was as steady as a rock; no trader lasted long who could not lie with a
straight face and an easy voice.
and yet you kept it in a secret place.
i do collect old things, high lord, from times past. there do be those who would steal such, did they
lay easy to hand.
turak regarded the blackandwhite disk for a moment. this iscuendillar , trader  do you know that
name?  and older than you perhaps know. come with me.
domon followed the man cautiously, feeling a little more sure of himself. with any lord of the lands he
knew, if guards were going to be summoned, they already would have been. but the little he had seen of
seanchan told him they did not do things as other men did. he schooled his face to stillness.
he was led into another room. he thought the furniture here had to have been brought by turak. it
seemed to be made of curves, with no straight lines at all, and the wood was polished to bring out strange
graining. there was one chair, on a silk carpet woven in birds and flowers, and one large cabinet made in
a circle. folding screens made new walls.
the man with the braid opened the doors of the cabinet to reveal shelves holding an odd assortment of
figurines, cups, bowls, vases, fifty different things, no two alike in size or shape. domons breath caught
as turak carefully set the disk beside its exact twin.
cuendillar, turak said. that is what i collect, trader. only the empress herself has a finer
collection.
domons eyes almost popped out of his head. if everything on those shelves was trulycuendillar , it was
enough to buy a kingdom, or at the least to found a great house. even a king might beggar himself to buy
so much of it, if he even knew where to find so much. he put on a smile.
high lord, please accept this piece as a gift. he did not want to let it go, but that was better than
angering this seanchan.maybe the darkfriends will chase him now . i do be but a simple trader. i
want only to trade. let me sail, and i do promise that  
turaks expression never changed, but the man with the braid cut domon off with a snapped,
unshaven dog! you speak of giving the high lord what captain egeanin has already given. you
bargain, as if the high lord were a  a merchant! you will be flayed alive over nine days, dog, and  
the barest motion of turaks finger silenced him.
i cannot allow you to leave me, trader, the high lord said. in this shadowed land of oathbreakers, i
find none who can converse with a man of sensibilities. but you are a collector. perhaps your
conversation will be interesting. he took the chair, lolling back in its curves to study domon.
domon put on what he hoped was an ingratiating smile. high lord, i do be a simple trader, a simple
man. i do no have the way of talking with great lords.



the man with the braid glared at him, but turak seemed not to hear. from behind one of the screens, a
slim, pretty young woman appeared on quick feet to kneel beside the high lord, offering a lacquered
tray bearing a single cup, thin and handleless, of some steaming black liquid. her dark, round face was
vaguely reminiscent of the sea folk. turak took the cup carefully in his longnailed fingers, never looking
at the young woman, and inhaled the fumes. domon took one look at the girl and pulled his eyes away
with a strangled gasp; her white silk robe was embroidered with flowers, but so sheer he could see right
through it, and there was nothing beneath but her own slimness.
the aroma ofkaf , turak said, is almost as enjoyable as the flavor. now, trader. i have learned that
cuendillar is even more rare here than in seanchan. tell me how a simple trader came to possess a
piece. he sipped his kaf and waited.
domon took a deep breath and set about trying to lie his way out of falme.

chapter 30

daes daemar

in the room shared by hurin and loial, rand peered through the window at the ordered lines and
terraces of cairhien, the stone buildings and slate roofs. he could not see the illuminators chapter house;
even if huge towers and great lords houses had not been in the way, the city walls would have prevented
it. the illuminators were on everyones tongues in the city, even now, days after the night when they had
lofted only one nightflower into the sky, and that early. a dozen different versions of the scandal were
being told, discounting minor variations, but none close to the truth.
rand turned away. he hoped no one had been hurt in the fire, but the illuminators had not so far
admitted there had been a fire. they were a closemouthed lot about what went on inside their chapter
house.
i will take the next watch, he told hurin, as soon as i come back.
there is no need, my lord. hurin bowed as deeply as any cairhienin. i can keep watch. truly, my
lord need not trouble himself.
rand drew a deep breath and exchanged looks with loial. the ogier only shrugged. the sniffer was
growing more formal every day they remained in cairhien; the ogier simply commented that humans
often acted oddly.
hurin, rand said, you used to call me lord rand, and you used not to bow every time i looked at



you.i want him to unbend and call me lord rand again , he thought with amazement.lord rand!
light, we have to get out of here before i start wantinghim to bow . will you please sit down? you
make me tired, looking at you.
hurin stood with his back stiff, yet appeared ready to leap to perform any task rand might request. he
neither sat down nor relaxed now. it wouldnt be proper, my lord. we have to show these cairhienin
we know how to be every bit as proper as  
will you stop saying that! rand shouted.
as you wish, my lord.
it was an effort for rand not to sigh again. hurin, im sorry. i should not have shouted at you.
its your right, my lord, hurin said simply. if i dont do the way you want, its your right to shout.
rand stepped toward the sniffer with the intention of grabbing the mans collar and shaking him.
a knock on the connecting door to rands room froze them all, but rand was pleased to see that hurin
did not wait to ask permission before picking up his sword. the heronmark blade was at rands waist;
going out, he touched its hilt. he waited for loial to seat himself on his long bed, arranging his legs and
the tails of his coat to further obscure the blanketcovered chest under the bed, then yanked open the
door.
the innkeeper stood there, rocking with eagerness and pushing his tray at rand. two sealed parchments
lay on the tray. forgive me, my lord, cuale said breathlessly. i could not wait until you came down,
and then you were not in your own room, and  and . . . forgive me, but . . . he jiggled the tray.
rand snatched the invitations  there had been so many  without looking at them, took the
innkeepers arm, and turned him toward the door to the hall. thank you, master cuale, for taking the
trouble. if youll leave us alone, now, please . . .
but, my lord, cuale protested, these are from  
thank you. rand pushed the man into the hall and pulled the door shut firmly. he tossed the
parchments onto the table. he hasnt done that before. loial, do you think he was listening at the door
before he knocked?
you are starting to think like these cairhienin. the ogier laughed, but his ears twitched thoughtfully
and he added, still, he is cairhienin, so he may well have been. i dont think we said anything he should
not have heard.
rand tried to remember. none of them had mentioned the horn of valere, or trollocs, or darkfriends.
when he found himself wondering what cuale could make of what they actually had said, he gave himself
a shake. this place is getting to you, too, he muttered to himself.
my lord? hurin had picked up the sealed parchments and was gazing wideeyed at the seals. my
lord, these are from lord barthanes, high seat of house damodred, and from  his voice dropped
with awe  the king.
rand waved them away. they still go in the fire like the rest. unopened.



but, my lord!
hurin, rand said patiently, you and loial between you have explained this great game to me. if i go
wherever it is theyve invited me, the cairhienin will read something into it and think i am part of
somebodys plot. if i dont go, theyll read something into that. if i send back an answer, they will dig for
meaning in it, and the same if i dont answer. and since half of cairhien apparently spies on the other
half, everybody knows what i do. i burned the first two, and i will burn these, just like all the others.
one day there had been twelve in the pile he tossed into the commonroom fireplace, seals unbroken.
whatever they make of it, at least its the same for everybody. i am not for anyone in cairhien, and i am
not against anyone.
i have tried to tell you, loial said, i dont think it works that way. whatever you do, cairhienin will
see some sort of plot in it. at least, that is what elder haman always said.
hurin held the sealed invitations out to rand as if offering gold. my lord, this one bears the personal
seal of galldrian. his personal seal, my lord. and this one the personal seal of lord barthanes, who is
next to the king himself in power. my lord, burn these, and you make enemies as powerful as you can
find. burning thems worked so far because the other houses are all waiting to see what youre up to,
and thinking you must have powerful allies to risk insulting them. but lord barthanes  and the king!
insult them, and theyll act for sure.
rand scrubbed his hands through his hair. what if i refuse them both?
it wont work, my lord. every last house has sent you an invitation, now. if you decline these  well,
for sure at least one of the other houses will figure, if youre not allied with the king or lord barthanes,
then they can answer your insult of burning their invitation. my lord, i hear the houses in cairhien use
killers, now. a knife in the street. an arrow from a rooftop. poison slipped in your wine.
you could accept them both, loial suggested. i know you dont want to, rand, but it might even be
fun. an evening at a lords manor, or even at the royal palace. rand, the shienarans believed in you.
rand grimaced. he knew it had been chance that the shienarans thought he was a lord; a chance
likeness of names, a rumor among the servants, and moiraine and the amyrlin stirring it all. but selene
had believed it, too.maybe shell be at one of these.
hurin was shaking his head violently, though. builder, you dont knowdaes daemar as well as you
think you do. not the way they play it in cairhien, not now. with most houses, it wouldnt matter. even
when theyre plotting against each other to the knife, they act like they arent, out where everybody can
see. but not these two. house damodred held the throne until laman lost it, and they want it back. the
king would crush them, if they werent nearly as powerful as he is. you cant find bitterer rivals than
house riatin and house damodred. if my lord accepts both, both houses will know it as soon as he
sends his answers, and theyll both think hes part of some plot by the other against them. theyll use the
knife and the poison as quick as look at you.
and i suppose, rand growled, if i only accept one, the other will think im allied with that house.
hurin nodded. and they will probably try to kill me to stop whatever im involved in. hurin nodded
again. then do you have any suggestion as to how i avoid any of them wanting to see me dead? hurin
shook his head. i wish id never burned those first two.
yes, my lord. but it wouldnt have made much difference, im guessing. whoever you accepted or



rejected, these cairhienin would see something in it.
rand held out his hand, and hurin laid the two folded parchments in it. the one was sealed, not with the
tree and crown of house damodred, but with barthaness charging boar. the other bore galldrians
stag. personal seals. apparently he had managed to rouse interest in the highest quarters by doing
nothing at all.
these people are crazy, he said, trying to think of a way out of this.
yes, my lord.
i will let them see me in the common room with these, he said slowly. whatever was seen in the
common room at midday was known in ten houses before nightfall, and in all of them by daybreak next.
i wont break the seals. that way, they will know i have not answered either one yet. as long as they
are waiting to see which way i jump, maybe i can earn a few more days. ingtar has to come soon. he
has to.
now that is thinking like a cairhienin, my lord, hurin said, grinning.
rand gave him a sour look, then stuffed the parchments into his pocket on top of selenes letters. lets
go, loial. maybe ingtar has arrived.
when he and loial reached the common room, no man and woman in it looked at rand. cuale was
polishing a silver tray as if his life depended on its gleam. the serving girls hurried between the tables as if
rand and the ogier did not exist. every last person at the tables stared into his or her mug as if the
secrets of power lay in wine or ale. not one of them said a word.
after a moment, he pulled the two invitations from his pocket and studied the seals, then stuck them
back. cuale gave a little jump as rand started for the door. before it closed behind him, he heard
conversation spring up again.
rand strode down the street so fast that loial did not have to shorten his stride to stay beside him. we
have to find a way out of the city, loial. this trick with the invitations cant work more than two or three
days. if ingtar doesnt come by then, we must leave anyway.
agreed, loial said.
but how?
loial began ticking off points on his thick fingers. fain is out there, or there would not have been
trollocs in the foregate. if we ride out, they will be on us as soon as we are out of sight of the city. if we
travel with a merchant train, theyll certainly attack it. no merchant would have more than five or six
guards, and they would probably run as soon as they saw a trolloc. if only we knew how many
trollocs fain has, and how many darkfriends. you have cut his numbers down. he did not mention the
trolloc he had killed, but from his frown, his long eyebrows hanging down onto his cheeks, he was
thinking of it.
it doesnt matter how many he has, rand said. ten are as bad as a hundred. if ten trollocs attack us,
i dont think well get away again. he avoided thinking of the way he might, just might, deal with ten
trollocs. it had not worked when he tried to help loial, after all.



i do not think we could, either. i dont think we have money to take passage very far, but even so, if
we tried to reach the foregate docks  well, fain must have darkfriends watching. if he thought we
were taking ship, i dont believe he would care who saw the trollocs. even if we fought free of them
somehow, we would have to explain ourselves to the city guards, and they would certainly not believe we
cannot open the chest, so  
we are not letting any cairhienin see that chest, loial.
the ogier nodded. and the city docks are no good, either. the city docks were reserved for the grain
barges and the pleasure craft of the lords and ladies. no one came to them without permission. one
could look down on them from the wall, but it was a drop that would break even loials neck. loial
wiggled his thumb as if trying to think of a point for that, too. i suppose it is too bad we cannot reach
stedding tsofu. trollocs would never come into astedding . but i dont suppose they would let us get
that far without attacking.
rand did not answer. they had reached the big guardhouse just inside the gate by which they had first
entered cairhien. outside, the foregate teemed and milled, and a pair of guards kept watch on them.
rand thought a man, dressed in what had once been good shienaran clothes, ducked back into the
crowd at the sight of him, but he could not be sure. there were too many people in clothes from too
many lands, all of them hurrying. he went up the steps into the guardhouse, past breastplated guards on
either side of the door.
the large anteroom had hard wooden benches for people with business there, mainly folk waiting with a
humble patience, wearing the plain, dark garments that marked the poorer commoners. there were a few
foregaters among them, picked out by shabbiness and bright colors, no doubt hoping for permission to
seek work inside the walls.
rand went straight to the long table in the back of the room. there was only one man seated behind it,
not a soldier, with one green bar across his coat. a plump fellow whose skin looked too tight, he
adjusted documents on the table and shifted the position of his inkwell twice before looking up at rand
and loial with a false smile.
how may i help you, my lord?
the same way i hoped you could help me yesterday, rand said with more patience than he felt, and
the day before, and the day before that. has lord ingtar come?
lord ingtar, my lord?
rand took a deep breath and let it out slowly. lord ingtar of house shinowa, from shienar. the same
man i have asked after every day ive come here.
no one of that name has entered the city, my lord.
are you certain? dont you need to look at your lists, at least?
my lord, the lists of foreigners who have come to cairhien are exchanged among the guardhouses at
sunrise and at sunset, and i examine them as soon as they come before me. no shienaran lord has
entered cairhien in some time.
and the lady selene? before you ask again, i do not know her house. but ive given you her name,



and i have described her to you three times. isnt that enough?
the man spread his hands. i am sorry, my lord. not knowing her house makes it very difficult. he
had a bland look on his face. rand wondered whether he would tell even if he knew.
a movement at one of the doors behind the desk caught rands eye  a man starting to step into the
anteroom, then turning away hurriedly. perhaps captain caldevwin can help me, rand told the clerk.
captain caldevwin, my lord?
i just saw him behind you.
i am sorry, my lord. if there was a captain caldevwin in the guardhouse, i would know.
rand stared at him until loial touched his shoulder. rand, i think we might as well go.
thank you for your help, rand said in a tight voice. i will return tomorrow.
it is my pleasure to do what i may, the man said with his false smile.
rand stalked out of the guardhouse so fast that loial had to hurry to catch him up in the street. he was
lying, you know, loial. he did not slow down, but rather hurried along as if he could burn away some of
his frustration through physical exertion. caldevwin was there. he could be lying about all of it. ingtar
could already be here, looking for us. ill bet he knows who selene is, too.
perhaps, rand.daes daemar  
light, im tired of hearing about the great game. i dont want to play it. i do not want to be any part
of it. loial walked beside him, saying nothing. i know, rand said at last. they think im a lord, and in
cairhien, even outland lords are part of the game. i wish id never put on this coat.moiraine , he
thought bitterly.shes still causing me trouble . almost immediately, though, if reluctantly, he admitted
that she could hardly be blamed for this. there had always been some reason to pretend to be what he
was not. first keeping hurins spirits up, and then trying to impress selene. after selene, there had not
seemed to be any way out of it. his steps slowed until he came to a halt. when moiraine let me go, i
thought things would be simple again. even chasing after the horn, even with  with everything, i
thought it would be simple.even with saidininside your head? light, what i wouldnt give to have
everything be simple again.
taveren, loial began.
i do not want to hear about that, either. rand started off again as fast as before. all i want is to give
the dagger to mat, and the horn to ingtar.then what? go mad? die? if i die before i go mad, at
least i wont hurt anybody else. but i dont want to die, either. lan can talk about sheathing the
sword, but im a shepherd, not a warder . if i can just not touch it, he muttered, maybe i can . . .
owyn almost made it.
what, rand? i didnt hear that.
it was nothing, rand said wearily. i wish ingtar would get here. and mat, and perrin.
they walked along in silence for a time, with rand lost in thought. thoms nephew had lasted almost



three years by channeling only when he thought he had to. if owyn had managed to limit how often he
channeled, it must be possible to not channel at all, no matter how seductivesaidin was.
rand, loial said, theres a fire up ahead.
rand got rid of his unwelcome thoughts and looked off into the city, frowning. a thick column of black
smoke billowed up above the rooftops. he could not see what lay at the base of it, but it was too close
to the inn.
darkfriends, he said, staring at the smoke. trollocs cant come inside the walls without being seen,
but darkfriends . . . hurin! he broke into a run, loial easily keeping pace beside him.
the closer they came, the more certain it was, until they rounded the last stoneterraced corner and
there was the defender of the dragonwall, smoke pouring out of its upper windows and flames breaking
through the roof. a crowd had gathered in front of the inn. cuale, shouting and jumping about, was
directing men carrying furnishings out into the street. a double line of men passed inside buckets filled
with water from a well down the street and empty buckets back out. most of the people only stood and
watched; a new gout of flame burst through the slate roof, and they gave a loudaaaah.
rand pushed through the crowd to the innkeeper. where is hurin?
careful with that table! cuale shouted. do not scrape it! he looked at rand and blinked. his face
was smudged with smoke. my lord? who? your manservant? i do not remember seeing him, my
lord. no doubt he went out. do not drop those candlesticks, fool! they are silver! cuale danced off to
harangue the men lugging his belongings out of the inn.
hurin wouldnt have gone out, loial said. he would not have left the . . . he looked around and left
it unsaid; some of the onlookers seemed to find an ogier as interesting as the fire.
i know, rand said, and plunged into the inn.
the common room hardly seemed as if the building were on fire. the double line of men stretched up the
stairs, passing their buckets, and others scrambled to carry out what furniture was left, but there was no
more smoke down here than if something had been burning the kitchen. as rand pressed upstairs, it
began to thicken. coughing, he ran up the steps.
the lines stopped short of the second landing, men halfway up the stairs hurling their water up into a
smokefilled hallway. flames licking up the walls flickered red through the black smoke.
one of the men grabbed rands arm. you cannot go up there, my lord. it is all lost above here. ogier,
speak to him.
it was the first rand realized that loial had followed him. go back, loial. ill bring him out.
you cannot carry hurin and the chest both, rand. the ogier shrugged. besides, i wont leave my
books to burn.
then keep low. under the smoke. rand dropped to his hands and knees on the stairs, and scrambled
up the rest of the way. there was cleaner air down near the floor; still smoky enough to make him cough,
but he could breathe it. yet even the air seemed blistering hot. he could not get enough of it through his
nose. he breathed through his mouth, and felt his tongue drying.



some of the water the men threw landed on him, soaking him to the skin. the coolness was only a
momentary relief; the heat came right back. he crawled on determinedly, aware of loial behind him only
from the ogiers coughing.
one wall of the hallway was almost solid flame, and the floor near it had already begun to add thin
tendrils to the cloud that hung over his head. he was glad he could not see what lay above the smoke.
ominous crackling told enough.
the door to hurins room had not caught yet, but it was hot enough that he had to try twice before he
could manage to push it open. the first thing to meet his eye was hurin, sprawled on the floor. rand
crawled to the sniffer and lifted him up. there was a lump on the side of his head the size of a plum.
hurin opened unfocused eyes. lord rand? he murmured faintly. . . . knock at the door . . . thought it
was more invi . . . his eyes rolled back in his head. rand felt for a heartbeat, and sagged with relief
when he found it.
rand . . . loial coughed. he was beside his bed, with the covers thrown up to reveal the bare boards
underneath. the chest was gone.
above the smoke, the ceiling creaked, and flaming pieces of wood fell to the floor.
rand said, get your books. i will take hurin. hurry. he started to drape the limp sniffer over his
shoulders, but loial took hurin from him.
the books will have to burn, rand. you cant carry him and crawl, and if you stand up, you will never
reach the stairs. the ogier pulled hurin up onto his broad back, arms and legs hanging to either side.
the ceiling gave a loud crack. we must hurry, rand.
go, loial. go, and ill follow.
the ogier crawled into the hall with his burden, and rand started after him. then he stopped, staring
back at the connecting door to his room. the banner was still in there. the banner of the dragon.let it
burn , he thought, and an answering thought came as if he had heard moiraine say it.your life may
depend on it. shes still trying to use me. your life may depend on it. aes sedai never lie.
with a groan, he rolled across the floor and kicked open the door to his room.
the other room was a mass of flame. the bed was a bonfire, red runners already crossed the floor.
there would be no crawling across that. getting to his feet, he ran crouching into the room, flinching from
the heat, coughing, choking. steam rose from his damp coat. one side of the wardrobe was already
burning. he snatched open the door. his saddlebags lay inside, still protected from the fire, one side
bulging with the banner of lews therin telamon, the wooden flute case beside them. for an instant, he
hesitated.i could still let it burn.
the ceiling above him groaned. he grabbed saddlebags and flute case and threw himself back through
the door, landing on his knees as burning timbers crashed where he had stood. dragging his burden, he
crawled into the hall. the floor shook with more falling beams.
the men with the buckets were gone when he reached the stairs. he all but slid down the steps to the
next landing, scrambled to his feet and ran through the nowempty building into the street. the onlookers



stared at him, with his face blackened and his coat covered with smut, but he staggered to where loial
had propped hurin against the wall of a house across the street. a woman from the crowd was wiping
hurins face with a cloth, but his eyes were still closed, and his breath came in heaves.
is there a wisdom nearby? rand demanded. he needs help. the woman looked at him blankly, and
he tried to remember the other names he had heard people call the women who would be wisdoms in
the two rivers. a wise woman? a woman you call mother somebody? a woman who knows herbs
and healing?
i am a reader, if that is what you mean, the woman said, but all i know to do for this one is to make
him comfortable. something is broken inside his head, i fear.
rand! itis you!
rand stared. it was mat, leading his horse through the crowd, with his bow strung across his back. a
mat whose face was pale and drawn, but still mat, and grinning, if weakly. and behind him came perrin,
his yellow eyes shining in the fire and earning as many looks as the blaze. and ingtar, dismounting in a
highcollared coat instead of armor, but still with his sword hilt sticking up over his shoulder.
rand felt a shiver run through him. its too late, he told them. you came too late. and he sat down
in the street and began to laugh.

chapter 31

on the scent

rand did not know verin was there until the aes sedai took his face in her hands. for a moment he
could see worry in her face, perhaps even fear, and then suddenly he felt as if he had been doused with
cold water, not the wet but the tingle. he gave one abrupt shudder and stopped laughing; she left him to
crouch over hurin. the reader watched her carefully. so did rand.what is she doing here? as if i
didnt know.
where did you go? mat demanded hoarsely. you all just disappeared, and now youre in cairhien
ahead of us. loial? the ogier shrugged uncertainly and eyed the crowd, his ears twitching. half the
people had turned from the fire to watch the newcomers. a few edged closer trying to listen.
rand let perrin give him a hand up. how did you find the inn? he glanced at verin, kneeling with her
hands on the sniffers head. her?



in a way, perrin said. the guards at the gate wanted our names, and a fellow coming out of the
guardhouse gave a jump when he heard ingtars name. he said he didnt know it, but he had a smile that
shouted lie a mile off.
i think i know the man you mean, rand said. he smiles that way all the time.
verin showed him her ring, mat put in, and whispered in his ear. he looked and sounded sick, his
cheeks flushed and tight, but he managed a grin. rand had never noticed his cheekbones before. i
couldnt hear what she said, but i didnt know whether his eyes were going to pop out of his head or he
was going to swallow his tongue first. all of a sudden, he couldnt do enough for us. he told us you were
waiting for us, and right where you were staying. offered to guide us himself, but he really looked
relieved when verin told him no. he snorted. lord rand of house althor.
its too long a story to explain now, rand said. where are uno and the rest? we will need them.
in the foregate. mat frowned at him, and went on slowly, uno said theyd rather stay there than
inside the walls. from what i can see, id rather be with them. rand, why will we need uno? have you
found . . .them ?
it was the moment rand realized suddenly he had been avoiding. he took a deep breath and looked his
friend in the eye. mat, i had the dagger, and i lost it. the darkfriends took it back. he heard gasps
from the cairhienin listening, but he did not care. they could play their great game if they wanted, but
ingtar had come, and he was finished with it at last. they cant have gone far, though.
ingtar had been silent, but now he stepped forward and gripped rands arm. you had it? and the 
he looked around at the onlookers  the other thing?
they took that back, too, rand said quietly. ingtar pounded a fist into his palm and turned away;
some of the cairhienin backed off from the look on his face.
mat chewed his lip, then shook his head. i didnt know it was found, so it isnt as if i had lost it again. it
is just still lost. it was plain he was speaking of the dagger, not the horn of valere. well find it again.
we have two sniffers, now. perrin is one, too. he followed the trail all the way to the foregate, after you
vanished with hurin and loial. i thought you might have just run off . . . well, you know what i mean.
wheredid you go? i still dont understand how you got so far ahead of us. that fellow said you have
been here days.
rand glanced at perrin hes a sniffer?  and found perrin studying him in return. he thought perrin
muttered something.shadowkiller? i must have heard him wrong . perrins yellow gaze held him for a
moment, seeming to hold secrets about him. telling himself he was having fancies im not mad. not
yet .  he pulled his eyes away.
verin was just helping a stillshaky hurin to his feet. i feel right as goose feathers, he was saying. still
a little tired, but . . . he let the words trail off, seeming to see her for the first time, to realize what had
happened for the first time.
the tiredness will last a few hours, she told him. the body must strain to heal itself quickly.
the cairhienin reader rose. aes sedai? she said softly. verin inclined her head, and the reader made
a full curtsy.



as quiet as they had been, the words aes sedai ran through the crowd in tones ranging from awe to
fear to outrage. everyone was watching now  not even cuale gave any attention to his own burning inn
 and rand thought a little caution might not be amiss after all.
do you have rooms yet? he asked. we need to talk, and we cant do it here.
a good idea, verin said. i have stayed here before at the great tree. we will go there.
loial went to fetch the horses  the inn roof had now fallen in completely, but the stables had not been
touched  and soon they were making their way through the streets, all riding except for loial, who
claimed he had grown used to walking again. perrin held the lead line to one of the packhorses they had
brought south.
hurin, rand said, how soon can you be ready to follow their trail again? can you follow it? the men
who hit you and started the fire left a trail, didnt they?
i can follow it now, my lord. and i could smell them in the street. it wont last long, though. there
werent any trollocs, and they didnt kill anybody. just men, my lord. darkfriends, i suppose, but you
cant always be sure of that by smell. a day, maybe, before it fades.
i dont think they can open the chest either, rand, loial said, or they would just have taken the horn.
it would be much easier to take that if they could, rather than the whole chest.
rand nodded. they must have put it in a cart, or on a horse. once they get it beyond the foregate,
theyll join the trollocs again, for sure. you will be able to follow that trail, hurin.
i will, my lord.
then you rest until youre fit, rand told him. the sniffer looked steadier, but he rode slumped, and his
face was weary. at best, they will only be a few hours ahead of us. if we ride hard . . . suddenly he
noticed that the others were looking at him, verin and ingtar, mat and perrin. he realized what he had
been doing, and his face colored. i am sorry, ingtar. its just that ive become used to being in charge, i
suppose. im not trying to take your place.
ingtar nodded slowly. moiraine chose well when she made lord agelmar name you my second.
perhaps it would have been better if the amyrlin seat had given you the charge. the shienaran barked a
laugh. at least you have actually managed to touch the horn.
after that they rode in silence.
the great tree could have been twin to the defender of the dragonwall, a tall stone cube of a building
with a common room paneled in dark wood and decorated with silver, a large, polished clock on the
mantel over the fireplace. the innkeeper could have been cuales sister. mistress tiedra had the same
slightly plump look and the same unctuous manner  and the same sharp eyes, the same air of listening
to what was behind the words you spoke. but tiedra knew verin, and her welcoming smile for the aes
sedai was warm; she never mentioned aes sedai aloud, but rand was sure she knew.
tiedra and a swarm of servants saw to their horses and settled them in their rooms. rands room was as
fine as the one that had burned, but he was more interested in the big copper bathtub two serving men
wrestled through the door, and the steaming buckets of water scullery maids brought up from the kitchen.
one look in the mirror above the washstand showed him a face that looked as if he had rubbed it with



charcoal, and his coat had black smears across the red wool.
he stripped off and climbed into the tub, but he thought as much as washed. verin was there. one of
three aes sedai that he could trust not to try to gentle him themselves, or turn him over to those who
would. or so it seemed, at least. one of three who wanted him to believe he was the dragon reborn, to
use him as a false dragon.shes moiraines eyes watching me, moiraines hand trying to pull my
strings. but i have cut the strings.
his saddlebags had been brought up, and a bundle from the packhorse containing fresh clothes. he
toweled off and opened the bundle  and sighed. he had forgotten that both the other coats he had
were as ornate as the one he had tossed on the back of a chair for a maid to clean. after a moment, he
chose the black coat, to suit his mood. silver herons stood on the high collar, and silver rapids ran down
his sleeves, water battered to froth against jagged rocks.
transferring things from his old coat to his new, he found the parchments. absently, he stuffed the
invitations in his pocket as he studied selenes two letters. he wondered how he could have been such a
fool. she was the beautiful young daughter of a noble house. he was a shepherd whom aes sedai were
trying to use, a man doomed to go mad if he did not die first. yet he could still feel the pull of her just
looking at her writing, could almost smell the perfume of her.
i am a shepherd, he told the letters, not a great man, and if i could marry anyone, it would be
egwene, but she wants to be aes sedai, and how can i marry any woman, love any woman, when ill go
mad and maybe kill her?
words could not lessen his memory of selenes beauty, though, or the way she made his blood go warm
just by looking at him. it almost seemed to him that she was in the room with him, that he could smell her
perfume, so much so that he looked around, and laughed to find himself alone.
having fancies like im addled already, he muttered.
abruptly he tipped back the mantle of the lamp on the bedside table, lit it, and thrust the letters into the
flame. outside the inn, the wind picked up to a roar, leaking in through the shutters and fanning the flames
to engulf the parchment. hurriedly he tossed the burning letters into the cold hearth just before the fire
reached his fingers. he waited until the last blackened curl went out before he buckled on his sword and
left the room.
verin had taken a private dining room, where shelves along the dark walls held even more silver than
those in the common room. mat was juggling three boiled eggs and trying to appear nonchalant. ingtar
peered into the unlit fireplace, frowning. loial had a few books from fal dara still in his pockets, and
was reading one beside a lamp.
perrin slouched at the table, studying his hands clasped on the tabletop. to his nose, the room smelled of
beeswax used to polish the paneling.it was him , he thought.rand is the shadowkiller. light, whats
happening to all of us? his hands tightened into fists, large and square.these hands were meant for a
smiths hammer, not an axe.
he glanced up as rand entered. perrin thought he looked determined, set on some course of action. the
aes sedai motioned rand to a highbacked armchair across from her.
how is hurin? rand asked her, arranging his sword so he could sit. resting?



he insisted on going out, ingtar answered. i told him to follow the trail only until he smelled trollocs.
we can follow it from there tomorrow. or do you want to go after them tonight?
ingtar, rand said uneasily, i really wasnt trying to take command. i just didnt think. yet not as
nervously as he would have once, perrin thought.shadowkiller. were all of us changing.
ingtar did not answer, but only kept staring into the fireplace.
there are some things that interest me greatly, rand, verin said quietly. one is how you vanished
from ingtars camp without a trace. another is how you arrived in cairhien a week before us. that clerk
was very clear on that. you would have had to fly.
one of mats eggs hit the floor and cracked. he did not look at it, though. he was looking at rand, and
ingtar had turned around. loial pretended to be reading still, but he wore a worried look, and his ears
were up in hairy points.
perrin realized he was staring, too. well, he did not fly, he said. i dont see any wings. maybe he has
more important things to tell us. verin shifted her attention to him, just for a moment. he managed to
meet her eyes, but he was the first to look away.aes sedai. light, why were we ever fools enough to
follow an aes sedai? rand gave him a grateful look, too, and perrin grinned at him. he was not the old
rand  he seemed to have grown into that fancy coat; it looked right on him, now  but he was still the
boy perrin had grown up with.shadowkiller. a man the wolves hold in awe. a man who can
channel.
i dont mind, rand said, and told his tale simply.
perrin found himself gaping. portal stones. other worlds, where the land seemed to shift. hurin
following the trail of where the darkfriendswould be. and a beautiful woman in distress, just like one in a
gleemans tale.
mat gave a soft, wondering whistle. and she brought you back? by one of these  these stones?
rand hesitated for a second. she must have, he said. so you see, thats how we got so far ahead of
you. when fain came, loial and i managed to steal back the horn of valere in the night, and we rode
on to cairhien because i didnt think we could make it past them once they were roused, and i knew
ingtar would keep coming south after them and reach cairhien eventually.
shadowkiller. rand looked at him, eyes narrowing, and perrin realized he had spoken the name aloud.
apparently not loud enough for anyone else to hear, though. no one else glanced at him. he found
himself wanting to tell rand about the wolves.i know about you. its only fair you know my secret,
too. but verin was there. he could not say it in front of her.
interesting, the aes sedai said, a thoughtful expression on her face. i would very much like to meet
this girl. if she can use a portal stone . . . even that name is not very widely known. she gave herself a
shake. well, that is for another time. a tall girl should not be difficult to find in the cairhienin houses.
aah, here is our meal.
perrin smelled lamb even before mistress tiedra led in a procession bearing trays of food. his mouth
watered more for that than for the peas and squash, the carrots and cabbage that came with it, or the hot
crusty rolls. he still found vegetables tasty, but sometimes, of late, he dreamed of red meat. not even
cooked, usually. it was disconcerting to find himself thinking that the nicely pink slices of lamb that the



innkeeper carved were too well done. he firmly took helpings of everything. and two of the lamb.
it was a quiet meal, with everyone concentrating on his own thoughts. perrin found it painful to watch
mat eat. mats appetite was as healthy as ever, despite the feverish flush to his face, and the way he
shoveled food into his mouth made it look like his last meal before dying. perrin kept his eyes on his plate
as much as possible, and wished they had never left emonds field.
after the maids cleared the table and left again, verin insisted they remain together until hurin returned.
he may bring word that will mean we must move at once.
mat returned to his juggling, and loial to his reading. rand asked the innkeeper if there were any more
books, and she brought himthe travels of jain farstrider . perrin liked that one, too, with its stories of
adventures among the sea folk and journeys to the lands beyond the aiel waste, where silk came from.
he did not feel like reading, though, so he set up a stones board on the table with ingtar. the shienaran
played with a slashing, daring style. perrin had always played doggedly, giving ground reluctantly, but he
found himself placing the stones with as much recklessness as ingtar. most of the games ended in a draw,
but he managed to win as many as ingtar did. the shienaran was eyeing him with a new respect by early
evening, when the sniffer returned.
hurins grin was at the same time triumphant and perplexed. i found them, lord ingtar. lord rand. i
tracked them to their lair.
lair? ingtar said sharply. you mean theyre hiding somewhere close by?
aye, lord ingtar. the ones who took the horn, i followed straight there, and there was trolloc scent
all around the place, though sneaking as if they didnt dare be seen, even there. and no wonder. the
sniffer took a deep breath. its the great manor lord barthanes just finished building.
lord barthanes! ingtar exclaimed. but he . . . hes . . . hes . . .
there are darkfriends among the high as well as the low, verin said smoothly. the mighty give their
souls to the shadow as often as the weak. ingtar scowled as if he did not want to think of that.
theres guards, hurin went on. well not get in with twenty men, not and get out again. a hundred
could do it, but two would be better. thats what i think, my lord.
what about the king? mat demanded. if this barthanes is a darkfriend, the king will help us.
i am quite sure, verin said dryly, that galldrian riatin would move against barthanes damodred on
therumor that barthanes is a darkfriend, and glad of the excuse. i am also quite sure galldrian would
never let the horn of valere out of his grasp once he had it. he would bring it out on feastdays to show
the people and tell them how great and mighty cairhien is, and no one would ever see it else.
perrin blinked with shock. but the horn of valere has to be there when the last battle is fought. he
couldnt just keep it.
i know little of cairhienin, ingtar told him, but ive heard enough of galldrian. he would feast us and
thank us for the glory we had brought to cairhien. he would stuff our pockets with gold and heap honors
on our heads. and if we tried to leave with the horn, hed cut our honored heads off without pausing to
take a breath.



perrin ran a hand through his hair. the more he found out about kings, the less he liked them.
what about the dagger? mat asked diffidently. he wouldnt want that, would he? ingtar glared at
him, and he shifted uncomfortably. i know the horn is important, but im not going to be fighting in the
last battle. that dagger . . .
verin rested her hands on the arms of her chair. galldrian shall not have it, either. what we need is
some way inside barthaness manor house. if we can only find the horn, we may also find a way to take
it back. yes, mat, and the dagger. once it is known that an aes sedai is in the city  well, i usually
avoid these things, but if i let slip to tiedra that i would like to see barthaness new manor, i should have
an invitation in a day or two. it should not be difficult to bring at least some of the rest of you. what is it,
hurin?
the sniffer had been rocking anxiously on his heels from the moment she mentioned an invitation. lord
rand already has one. from lord barthanes.
perrin stared at rand, and he was not the only one.
rand pulled two sealed parchments from his coat pocket and handed them to the aes sedai without a
word.
ingtar came to look wonderingly over her shoulder at the seals. barthanes, and . . . and galldrian!
rand, how did you come by these? what have you been doing?
nothing, rand said. i havent done anything. they just sent them to me. ingtar let out a long breath.
mats mouth was hanging open. well, they did just send them, rand said quietly. there was a dignity
to him that perrin did not remember; rand was looking at the aes sedai and the shienaran lord as
equals.
perrin shook his head.you arefitting that coat. were all changing.
lord rand burned all the rest, hurin said. every day they came, and every day he burned them. until
these, of course. every day from mightier houses. he sounded proud.
the wheel of time weaves us all into the pattern as it wills, verin said, looking at the parchments,
but sometimes it provides what we need before we know we need it.
casually she crumpled the kings invitation and tossed it into the fireplace, where it lay white on the cold
logs. breaking the other seal with her thumb, she read. yes. yes, this will do very well.
how can i go? rand asked her. they will know im no lord. i am a shepherd, and a farmer. ingtar
looked skeptical. i am, ingtar. i told you i am. ingtar shrugged; he still did not look convinced. hurin
stared at rand with flat disbelief.
burn me, perrin thought,if i didnt know him, i wouldnt believe it either . mat was watching rand
with his head tilted, frowning as if looking at something he had never seen before.he sees it, too, now .
you can do it, rand, perrin said. you can.
it will help, verin said, if you dont tell everyone what you are not. people see what they expect to
see. beyond that, look them in the eye and speak firmly. the way you have been talking to me, she
added dryly, and rands cheeks colored, but he did not drop his eyes. it doesnt matter what you say.



they will attribute anything out of place to your being an outlander. it will also help if you remember the
way you behaved before the amyrlin. if you are that arrogant, they will believe you are a lord if you wear
rags. mat snickered.
rand threw up his hands. all right. ill do it. but i still think they will know five minutes after i open my
mouth. when?
barthanes has asked you for five different dates, and one is tomorrow night.
tomorrow! ingtar exploded. the horn could be fifty miles downriver by tomorrow night, or  
verin cut him off. uno and your soldiers can watch the manor. if they try to take the horn anywhere,
we can easily follow, and perhaps retrieve it more easily than from inside barthaness walls.
perhaps so, ingtar agreed grudgingly. i just do not like to wait, now that the horn is almost in my
hands. i will have it. i must! i must!
hurin stared at him. but, lord ingtar, that isnt the way. what happens, happens, and what is meant to
be, will   ingtars glare cut him off, though he still muttered under his breath, it isnt the way, talking
of must.
ingtar turned back to verin stiffly. verin sedai, cairhienin are very strict in their protocol. if rand does
not send a reply, barthanes may be so insulted he will not let us in, even with that parchment in our
hands. but if rand does . . . well, fain, at least, knows him. we could be warning them to set a trap.
we will surprise them. her brief smile was not pleasant. but i think barthanes will want to see rand
in any case. darkfriend or not, i doubt he has given up plots against the throne. rand, he says you took
an interest in one of the kings projects, but he doesnt say what. what does he mean?
i dont know, rand said slowly. i havent done anything at all since i arrived. wait. maybe he means
the statue. we came through a village where they were digging up a huge statue. from the age of
legends, they said. the king means to move it to cairhien, though i dont know how he can move
something that big. but all i did was ask what it was.
we passed it in the day, and did not stop to ask questions. verin let the invitation fall in her lap. not a
wise thing for galldrian to do, perhaps, unearthing that. not that there is any real danger, but it is never
wise for those who dont know what they are doing to meddle with things from the age of legends.
what is it? rand asked.
asaangreal . she sounded as if it were really not very important, but perrin suddenly had the feeling
the two of them had entered a private conversation, saying things no one else could hear. one of a pair,
the two largest ever made, that we know of. and an odd pair, as well. one, still buried on tremalking,
can only be used by a woman. this one can only be used by a man. they were made during the war of
the powers, to be a weapon, but if there is anything to be thankful for in the end of that age or the
breaking of the world, it is that the end came before they could be used. together, they might well be
powerful enough to break the world again, perhaps even worse than the first breaking.
perrins hands tightened to knots. he avoided looking directly at rand, but even from the corner of his
eye he could see a whiteness around rands mouth. he thought rand might be afraid, and he did not
blame him a bit.



ingtar looked shaken, as well he might. that thing should be buried again, and as deeply as they can
pile dirt and stone. what would have happened if logain had found it? or any wretched man who can
channel, let alone one claiming hes the dragon reborn. verin sedai, you must warn galldrian what hes
doing.
what? oh, there is no need for that, i think. the two must be used in unison to handle enough of the
one power to break the world  that was the way in the age of legends; a man and a woman
working together were always ten times as strong as they were apart  and what aes sedai today
would aid a man in channeling? one by itself is powerful enough, but i can think of few women strong
enough to survive the flow through the one on tremalking. the amyrlin, of course. moiraine, and elaida.
perhaps one or two others. and three still in training. as for logain, it would have taken all his strength
simply to keep from being burned to a cinder, with nothing left for doing anything. no, ingtar, i dont
think you need worry. at least, not until the real dragon reborn proclaims himself, and then we will all
have enough to worry about as it is. let us worry now about what we shall do when we are inside
barthaness manor.
she was talking to rand. perrin knew it, and from the queasy look in mats eye, he did, too. even loial
shifted nervously in his chair.oh, light, rand, perrin thought. light, dont let her use you.
rands hands were pressing the tabletop so hard that his knuckles were white, but his voice was steady.
his eyes never left the aes sedai. first we have to take back the horn, and the dagger. and then it is
done, verin. then it is done.
watching verins smile, small and mysterious, perrin felt a chill. he did not think rand knew half what
he thought he did. not half.

chapter 32

dangerous words

lord barthaness manor crouched like a huge toad in the night, covering as much ground as a fortress,
with all its walls and outbuildings. it was no fortress, though, with tall windows everywhere, and lights,
and the sounds of music and laughter drifting out, yet rand saw guards moving on the tower tops and
along the roofwalks, and none of the windows were close to the ground. he got down from reds back
and smoothed his coat, adjusted his sword belt. the others dismounted around him, at the foot of broad,
whitestone stairs leading up to the wide, heavily carved doors of the manor.
ten shienarans, under uno, made an escort. the oneeyed man exchanged small nods with ingtar



before taking his men to join the other escorts, where ale had been provided and a whole ox was
roasting on a spit by a big fire.
the other ten shienarans had been left behind, along with perrin. every one of them had to be there for
a purpose, verin had said, and perrin had no purpose to serve this night. an escort was necessary for
dignity in cairhienin eyes, but more than ten would seem suspicious. rand was there because he had
received the invitation. ingtar had come to lend the prestige of his title, while loial was there because
ogier were sought after in the upper reaches of the cairhienin nobility. hurin pretended to be ingtars
bodyservant. his true purpose was to sniff out the darkfriends and trollocs if he could; the horn of
valere should not be far from them. mat, still grumbling about it, was pretending to be rands servant,
since he could feel the dagger when it was close. if hurin failed, perhaps he could find the darkfriends.
when rand had asked verin why she was there, she had only smiled and said, to keep the rest of you
out of trouble.
as they mounted the stairs, mat muttered, i still dont see why i have to be a servant. he and hurin
followed behind the others. burn me, if rand can be a lord, i can put on a fancy coat, too.
a servant, verin said without looking back at him, can go many places another man cannot, and
many nobles will not even see him. you and hurin have your tasks.
be quiet now, mat, ingtar put in, unless you want to give us away. they were approaching the
doors, where half a dozen guards stood with the tree and crown of house damodred on their chests,
and an equal number of men in dark green livery with tree and crown on the sleeve.
taking a deep breath, rand proffered the invitation. i am lord rand of house althor, he said all in a
rush, to get it over with. and these are my guests. verin aes sedai of the brown ajah. lord ingtar of
house shinowa, in shienar. loial, son of arent son of halan, from stedding shangtai. loial had asked
that hisstedding be left out of it, but verin insisted they needed every bit of formality they could offer.
the servant who had reached for the invitation with a perfunctory bow gave a little jerk at each
additional name; his eyes popped at verins. in a strangled voice he said, be welcome in house
damodred, my lords. be welcome, aes sedai. be welcome, friend ogier. he waved the other servants
to open the doors wide, and bowed rand and the others inside, where he hurriedly passed the invitation
to another liveried man and whispered in his ear.
this man had the tree and crown large on the chest of his green coat. aes sedai, he said, using his
long staff to make a bow, almost bending his head to his knees, to each of them in turn. my lords.
friend ogier. i am called ashin. please to follow me.
the outer hall held only servants, but ashin led them to a great room filled with nobles, with a juggler
performing at one end and tumblers at the other. voices and music coming from elsewhere said these
were not the only guests, or the only entertainments. the nobles stood in twos, and threes and fours,
sometimes men and women together, sometimes only one or the other, always with careful space
between so no one could overhear what was said. the guests wore the dark cairhienin colors, each with
bright stripes at least halfway down his or her chest, and some had them all the way to their waists. the
women had their hair piled high in elaborate towers of curls, every one different, and their dark skirts
were so wide they would have had to turn sideways to pass through any doorway narrower than those of
the manor. none of the men had the shaved heads of soldiers  they all wore dark velvet hats over long
hair, some shaped like bells, others flat  and as with the women, lace ruffles like dark ivory almost hid
their hands.



ashin rapped his staff and announced them in a loud voice, verin first.
they drew every eye. verin wore her brownfringed shawl, embroidered in grape vines; the
announcement of an aes sedai sent a murmur through the lords and ladies, and made the juggler drop
one of his hoops, though no one was watching him any longer. loial received almost as many looks, even
before ashin spoke his name. despite the silver embroidery on collar and sleeves, the otherwise
unrelieved black of rands coat made him seem almost stark beside the cairhienin, and his and ingtars
swords drew many glances. none of the lords appeared to be armed. rand heard the words
heronmark blade more than once. some of the glances he was receiving looked like frowns; he
suspected they came from men he had insulted by burning their invitations.
a slim, handsome man approached. he had long, graying hair, and multihued stripes crossed the front of
his deep gray coat from his neck almost to the hem just above his knees. he was extremely tall for a
cairhienin, no more than half a head shorter than rand, and he had a way of standing that made him
seem even taller, with his chin up so he seemed to be looking down at everyone else. his eyes were
black pebbles. he looked warily at verin, though.
grace honors me with your presence, aes sedai. barthanes damodreds voice was deep and sure.
his gaze swept across the others. i did not expect so distinguished a company. lord ingtar. friend
ogier. his bow to each was little more than a nod of the head; barthanes knew exactly how powerful
he was. and you, my young lord rand. you excite much comment in the city, and in the houses.
perhaps we will have a chance to talk this night. his tone said that he would not miss it if the chance
never came, that he had not been excited to any comment, but his eyes slid a fraction before he caught
them, to ingtar and loial, and to verin. be welcome. he let himself be drawn away by a handsome
woman who laid a beringed hand buried in lace on his arm, but his gaze drifted back to rand as he
walked away.
the murmur of conversation picked up once more, and the juggler spun his hoops again in a narrow
loop that almost reached the worked plaster ceiling, a good four spans up. the tumblers had never
stopped; a woman leaped into the air from the cupped hands of one of her compatriots, her oiled skin
shining in the light of a hundred lamps as she spun, and landed on her feet on the hands of a man who
was already standing atop anothers shoulders. he lifted her up on outstretched arms as the man below
raised him in the same way, and she spread her arms as if for applause. none of the cairhienin seemed
to notice.
verin and ingtar drifted into the crowd. the shienaran received a few wary looks; some looked at the
aes sedai with wide eyes, others with the worried frowns of those finding a rabid wolf within arms
reach. the latter came from men more often than women, and some of the women spoke to her.
rand realized that mat and hurin had already disappeared to the kitchens, where all the servants who
had come with the guests would be gathering until sent for. he hoped they would not have trouble
sneaking away.
loial bent down to speak for his ear alone. rand, there is a waygate nearby. i can feel it.
you mean this was an ogier grove? rand said softly, and loial nodded.
stedding tsofu had not been found again when it was planted, or the ogier who helped build
alcairrahienallen would not have needed a grove to remind them of thestedding . this was all forest
when i came through cairhien before, and belonged to the king.



barthanes probably took it away in some plot. rand looked around the room nervously. everyone
was still talking, but more than a few were watching the ogier and him. he could not see ingtar. verin
stood at the center of a knot of women. i wish we could stay together.
verin says not, rand. she says it would make them all suspicious and angry, thinking we were holding
ourselves aloof. we have to allay suspicion until mat and hurin find whatever they find.
i heard what she said as well as you, loial. but i still say, if barthanes is a darkfriend, then he must
know why were here. going off by ourselves is just asking to be knocked on the head.
verin says he wont do anything until he finds out whether he can make use of us. just do what she told
us, rand. aes sedai know what they are about. loial walked into the crowd, gathering a circle of lords
and ladies before he had gone ten steps.
others started toward rand, now that he was alone, but he turned in the other direction and hurried
away.aes sedai may know what theyre about, but i wish i did. i dont like this. light, but i wish i
knew if she was telling the truth. aes sedai never lie, but the truth you hear may not be the truth
you think it is.
he kept moving to avoid talking with the nobles. there were many other rooms, all filled with lords and
ladies, all with entertainers: three different gleemen in their cloaks, more jugglers and tumblers, and
musicians playing flutes, bitterns, dulcimers, and lutes, plus five different sizes of fiddle, six kinds of horn,
straight or curved or curled, and ten sizes of drum from tambour to kettle. he gave some of the horn
players a second look, those with curled horns, but the instruments were all plain brass.
they wouldnt have the horn of valere out here fool, he thought.not unless barthanes means to
have dead heroes come as part of the entertainment.
there was even a bard in silverworked tairen boots and a yellow coat, strolling through the rooms
plucking his harp and sometimes stopping to declaim in high chant. he glared contemptuously at the
gleemen and did not linger in the rooms where they were, but rand saw little difference between him and
them except for their clothes.
suddenly barthanes was walking by rands side. a liveried servant immediately offered his silver tray
with a bow. barthanes took a blownglass goblet of wine. walking backwards ahead of them still
bowing, the servant held the tray toward rand until rand shook his head, then melted into the crowd.
you seem restless, barthanes said, sipping.
i like to walk. rand wondered how to follow verins advice, and remembering what she had said
about his visit to the amyrlin, he settled into cat crosses the courtyard. he knew no more arrogant way
to walk than that. barthaness mouth tightened, and rand thought perhaps the lord found it too arrogant,
but verins advice was all he had to go by, so he did not stop. to take some of the edge off, he said
pleasantly, this is a fine party. you have many friends, and ive never seen so many entertainers.
many friends, barthanes agreed. you can tell galldrian how many, and who. some of the names
might surprise him.
i have never met the king, lord barthanes, and i dont expect i ever will.



of course. you just happened to be in that flyspeck village. you were not checking on the progress of
retrieving that statue. a great undertaking, that.
yes. he had begun thinking of verin again, wishing she had given him some advice on how to talk with
a man who assumed he was lying. he added without thinking, its dangerous to meddle with things from
the age of legends if you dont know what you are doing.
barthanes peered into his wine, musing as if rand had just said something profound. are you saying
you do not support galldrian in this? he asked finally.
i told you, ive never met the king.
yes, of course. i did not know andormen played at the great game so well. we do not see many here
in cairhien.
rand took a deep breath to stop from telling the man angrily that he was not playing their game. there
are many grain barges from andor in the river.
merchants and traders. who notices such as they? as well notice the beetles on the leaves.
barthaness voice carried equal contempt for both beetles and merchants, but once again he frowned as
if rand had hinted at something. not many men travel in company with aes sedai. you seem too young
to be a warder. i suppose lord ingtar is verin sedais warder?
we are who we said we are, rand said, and grimaced.except me.
barthanes was studying rands face almost openly. young. young to carry a heronmark blade.
i am less than a year old, rand said automatically, and immediately wished he had it back. it sounded
foolish, to his ear, but verin had said act as he had with the amyrlin seat, and that was the answer lan
had given him. a borderman considered the day he was given his sword to be his nameday.
so. an andorman, and yet borderlandtrained. or is it wardertrained? barthaness eyes narrowed,
studying rand. i understand morgase has only one son. named gawyn, i have heard. you must be
much like him in age.
i have met him, rand said cautiously.
those eyes. that hair. i have heard the andoran royal line has almost aiel coloring in their hair and
eyes.
rand stumbled, though the floor was smooth marble. im not aiel, lord barthanes, and im not of the
royal line, either.
as you say. you have given me much to think on. i believe we may find common ground when we talk
again. barthanes nodded and raised his glass in a small salute, then turned to speak to a grayhaired man
with many stripes of color down his coat.
rand shook his head and moved on, away from more conversation. it had been bad enough talking to
one cairhienin lord; he did not want to risk two. barthanes appeared to find deep meanings in the most
trivial comments. rand realized he had just now learned enough ofdaes daemar to know he had no
idea at all how it was played.mat, hurin, find something fast, so we can get out of here. these



people are crazy.
and then he entered another room, and the gleeman at the end of it, strumming his harp and reciting a
tale fromthe great hunt of the horn , was thom merrilin. rand stopped dead. thom did not seem to
see him, though the gleemans gaze passed over him twice. it seemed that thom had meant what he said.
a clean break.
rand turned to go, but a woman stepped smoothly in front of him and put a hand on his chest, the lace
falling back from a soft wrist. her head did not quite come to his shoulder, but her tall array of curls
easily reached as high as his eyes. the high neck of her gown put lace ruffles under her chin, and stripes
covered the front of her dark blue dress below her breasts. i am alaine chuliandred, and you are the
famous rand althor. in barthaness own manor, i suppose he has the right to speak to you first, but we
are all fascinated by what we hear of you. i even hear that you play the flute. can it be true?
i play the flute.how did she . . .?caldevwin. light, everybody does hear everything in cairhien .
if you will excuse  
i have heard that some outland lords play music, but i never believed it. i would like very much to hear
you play. perhaps you will talk with me, of this and that. barthanes seemed to find your conversation
fascinating. my husband spends his days sampling his own vineyards, and leaves me quite alone. he is
never there to talk with me.
you must miss him, rand said, trying to edge around her and her wide skirts. she gave a tinkling laugh
as if he had said the funniest thing in the world.
another woman sidled in beside the first, and another hand was laid on his chest. she wore as many
stripes as alaine, and they were of an age, a good ten years older than he. do you think to keep him to
yourself, alaine? the two women smiled at each other while their eyes threw daggers. the second
turned her smile on rand. i am belevaere osiellin. are all andormen so tall? and so handsome?
he cleared his throat. ah . . . some are as tall. pardon me, but if you will  
i saw you talking with barthanes. they say you know galldrian, as well. you must come to see me,
and talk. my husband is visiting our estates in the south.
you have the sublety of a tavern wench, alaine hissed at her, and immediately was smiling up at rand.
she has no polish. no man could like a woman with a manner so rough. bring your flute to my manor,
and we will talk. perhaps you will teach me to play?
what alaine thinks of as subtlety, belevaere said sweetly, is but lack of courage. a man who wears a
heronmark sword must be brave. that truly is a heronmark blade, is it not?
rand tried backing away from them. if you will just excuse me, i   they followed step for step until
his back hit the wall; the width of their skirts together made another wall in front of him.
he jumped as a third woman crowded in beside the other two, her skirts joining theirs to the wall on that
side. she was older than they, but just as pretty, with an amused smile that did not lessen the sharpness
of her eyes. she wore half again as many stripes as alaine and belevaere; they made tiny curtsies and
glared at her sullenly.
are these two spiders trying to toil you in their webs? the older woman laughed. half the time they



tangle themselves more firmly than anyone else. come with me, my fine young andoran, and i will tell
you some of the troubles they would give you. for one thing, i have no husband to worry about.
husbands always make trouble.
over alaines head he could see thom, straightening from a bow to no applause or notice whatsoever.
with a grimace the gleeman snatched a goblet from the tray of a startled servant.
i see someone i must speak to, rand told the women, and squeezed out of the box they had put him
in just as the last woman reached for his arm. all three stared after him as he hurried to the gleeman.
thom eyed him over the lip of the goblet, then took another long swallow.
thom, i know you said a clean break, but i had to get away from those women. all they wanted to talk
about was their husbands being away, but they were already hinting at other things. thom choked on his
wine, and rand slapped his back. you drink too fast, and something always goes down the wrong way.
thom, they think i am plotting with barthanes, or maybe galldrian, and i dont think they will believe me
when i say im not. i just needed an excuse to leave them.
thom stroked his long mustaches with one knuckle and peered across the room at the three women.
they were still standing together, watching rand and him. i recognize those three, boy. breane
taborwin alone would give you an education such as every man should have at least once in his life, if he
can live through it. worried about their husbands. i like that, boy. abruptly his eyes sharpened. you
told me you were clear of aes sedai. half the talk here tonight is of the andoranlord appearing with no
warning, and an aes sedai at his side. barthanes and galldrian. youve let the white tower put you in
the cooking pot this time.
she only came yesterday, thom. and as soon as the horn is safe, ill be free of them again. i mean to
see to it.
you sound as if it isnt safe now, thom said slowly. you didnt sound that way before.
darkfriends stole it, thom. they brought it here. barthanes is one of them.
thom seemed to study his wine, but his eyes darted to make sure no one was close enough to listen.
more than the three women were watching them with sideways glances while pretending to talk among
themselves, but every knot maintained its distance from every other. still, thom spoke softly. a
dangerous thing to say if it isnt true, and more dangerous if it is. an accusation like that, against the most
powerful man in the kingdom . . . you say he has the horn? i suppose youre after my help again, now
that youre tangled with the white tower once more.
no. he had decided thom had been right, even if the gleeman did not know why. he could not
involve anyone else in his troubles. i just wanted to get away from those women.
the gleeman blew out his mustaches, taken aback. well. yes. that is well. the last time i helped you, i
got a limp out of it, and you seem to have let yourself be tied to tar valon strings again. youll have to
get yourself out of it this time. he sounded as if he were trying to convince himself.
i will, thom. i will.just as soon as the horn is safe and mat has that bloody dagger back. mat,
hurin, where are you?
as if the thought had been a summons, hurin appeared in the room, eyes searching among the lords and



ladies. they looked through him; servants did not exist unless needed. when he found rand and thom,
he made his way between the small clusters of nobles and bowed to rand. my lord, i was sent to tell
you. your manservant had a fall and twisted his knee. i dont know how bad, my lord.
for a moment rand stared before he understood. conscious of all the eyes on him, he spoke loudly
enough for the nobles closest to overhear. clumsy fool. what good is he to me if he cant walk? i
suppose id better come see how badly hes hurt himself.
it seemed to be the right thing to say. hurin sounded relieved when he bowed again and said, as my
lord wishes. if my lord will follow me?
you play very well at being a lord, thom said softly. but remember this. cairhienin may playdaes
daemar , but it was the white tower made the great game in the first place. watch yourself, boy.
with a glare at the nobles, he set his empty goblet on the tray of a passing servant and strolled away,
plucking his harp. he began recitinggoodwife mili and the silk merchant.
lead on, man, rand told hurin, feeling foolish. as he followed the sniffer out of the room, he could
feel the eyes following him.

chapter 33

a message from the dark

have you found it? rand asked as he followed hurin down a cramped flight of stairs. the kitchens lay
on the lower levels, and the servants who had come attending the guests had all been sent there. or is
mat really hurt?
oh, mats fine, lord rand. the sniffer frowned. at least, he sounds all right, and he grumbles like a
hale man. i didnt mean to worry you, but i needed a reason for you to come below. i found the trail
easy enough. the men who set fire to the inn all entered a walled garden behind the manor. trollocs
joined them, went in to the garden with them. sometime yesterday, i think. maybe even night before
last. he hesitated. lord rand, they didnt come out again. they must still be in there.
at the foot of the stairs the sounds of the servants enjoying themselves drifted down the hall, laughter
and singing. someone had a bittern, strumming a raucous tune to clapping and the thump of dancing.
there was no worked plaster or fine tapestries here, only bare stone and plain wood. light in the halls
came from rush torches, smoking the ceiling and spread far enough apart that the light faded between
them.



im glad you are talking to me naturally again, rand said. the way you have been bowing and
scraping, i was beginning to think you were more cairhienin than the cairhienin.
hurins face colored. well, as to that . . . he glanced down the hall toward the noise and looked as if
he wanted to spit. they all pretend to be so proper, but . . . lord rand, every one of them says hes
loyal to his master or mistress, but they all hint theyre willing to sell what they know, or have heard. and
when they have a few drinks in them, theyll tell you, all whispering in your ear, things about the lords and
ladies they serve thatd fair make your hair stand on end. i know theyre cairhienin, but i never heard of
such goings on.
we will be out of here soon, hurin. rand hoped it was true. where is this garden? hurin turned
down a side hall leading toward the back of the manor. did you bring ingtar and the others down
already?
the sniffer shook his head. lord ingtar had let himself be cornered by six or seven of those who call
themselves ladies. i couldnt get close enough to speak to him. and verin sedai was with barthanes. she
gave me such a look when i came near, i never even tried to tell her.
they rounded another corner just then, and there were loial and mat, the ogier standing a little stooped
for the lower ceiling.
loials grin almost split his face. there you are. rand, i was never so glad to get away from anyone as
from those people upstairs. they kept asking me if the ogier were coming back, and if galldrian had
agreed to pay what was owed. it seems the reason all the ogier stonemasons left is because galldrian
stopped paying them, except with promises. i kept telling them i didnt know anything about it, but half of
them seemed to think that i was lying, and the other half that i was hinting at something.
well be out of here soon, rand assured him. mat, are you all right? his friends face looked more
hollowcheeked than he remembered, even back at the inn, and his cheekbones more prominent.
i feel fine, mat said grumpily, but i certainly didnt have any trouble leaving theother servants. the
ones who werent asking if you starved me thought i was sick and didnt want to come too close.
have you sensed the dagger? rand asked.
mat shook his head glumly. the only thing ive sensed is that somebodys watching me, most of the
time. these people are as bad as fades for sneaking around. burn me, i nearly jumped out of my skin
when hurin told me hed located the darkfriends trail. rand, i cant feel it at all, and ive been through
this bloody building from rafters to basement.
that does not mean it isnt here, mat. i put it in the chest with the horn, remember. maybe that keeps
you from feeling it. i dont think fain knows how to open it, else hed not have gone to the trouble of
carrying the weight when he fled fal dara. even that much gold isnt important beside the horn of
valere. when we find the horn, we will find the dagger. youll see.
as long as i dont have to pretend to be your servant anymore, mat muttered. as long as you dont
go mad and . . .  he let the words die with a twist of his mouth.
rand is not mad, mat, loial said. the cairhienin would never have let him in here if he were not a
lord. they are the ones who are mad.



im not mad, rand said harshly. not yet. hurin, show me this garden.
this way, lord rand.
they went out into the night by a small door that rand had to duck to get through; loial was forced to
bend over and hunch his shoulders. there was enough light in yellow pools from the windows above for
rand to make out brick walks between square flower beds. the shadows of stables and other
outbuildings bulked in the darkness to either side. occasional fragments of music drifted out, from the
servants below or from those entertaining their masters above.
hurin led them along the walks until even the dim glow failed and they made their way by moonlight
alone, their boots crunching softly on the brick. bushes that would have been bright with flowers by
daylight now made strange humps in the dark. rand fingered his sword and did not let his eyes stay on
any one spot too long. a hundred trollocs could be hiding around them unseen. he knew hurin would
have smelled trollocs if they were there, but that did not help a great deal. if barthanes was a
darkfriend, then at least some of his servants and guards had to be, too, and hurin could not always
smell a darkfriend. darkfriends leaping out of the night would not be much better than trollocs.
there, lord rand, hurin whispered, pointing.
ahead, stone walls not much higher than loials head enclosed a square perhaps fifty paces on a side.
rand could not be sure, in the shadows, but it looked as if the gardens stretched on beyond the walls. he
wondered why barthanes had built a walled enclosure in the middle of his garden. no roof showed
above the wall.why would they go in there and stay?
loial bent to put his mouth close to rands ear. i told you this was all an ogier grove, once. rand, the
waygate is within that wall. i can feel it.
rand heard mat sigh despairingly. we cant give up, mat, he said.
im not giving up. i just have enough brains not to want to travel the ways again.
we may have to, rand told him. go find ingtar and verin. get them alone somehow  i dont care
how  and tell them i think fain has taken the horn through a waygate. just dont let anyone else hear.
and remember to limp; you are supposed to have had a fall. it was a wonder to him that even fain
would risk the ways, but it seemed the only answer.they wouldnt spend a day and a night just
sitting in there, without a roof over their heads.
mat swept a low bow, and his voice was heavy with sarcasm. at once, my lord. as my lord wishes.
shall i carry your banner, my lord? he started back for the manor, his grumbles fading away. now i
have to limp. next itll be a broken neck, or . . .
hes just worried about the dagger, rand, loial said.
i know, rand said.but how long before he tells somebody what i am, not even meaning to? he
could not believe mat would betray him on purpose; there was that much of their friendship left, at least.
loial, boost me up where i can see over the wall.
rand, if the darkfriends are still  
they arent. boost me up, loial.



the three of them moved close to the wall, and loial made a stirrup with his hands for rands foot. the
ogier straightened easily with the weight, lifting rands head just high enough to see over the top of the
wall.
the thin, waning moon gave little light, and most of the area was in shadow, but there did not seem to be
any flowers or shrubs inside the walled square. only a lone bench of pale marble, placed as if one man
might sit on it to stare at what stood in the middle of the space like a huge upright stone slab.
rand caught the top of the wall and pulled himself up. loial gave a lowhsst and grabbed at his foot, but
he jerked free and rolled over the wall, dropping inside. there was closecropped grass under his feet;
he thought vaguely that barthanes must let sheep in, at least. staring at the shadowed stone slab, the
waygate, he was startled to hear boots thump to the ground beside him.
hurin climbed to his feet, dusting himself off. you should be careful doing that, lord rand. could be
anybody hiding in here. or anything. he peered into the darkness within the walls, feeling at his belt as if
for the short sword and swordbreaker he had had to leave at the inn; servants did not go armed in
cairhien. jump in a hole without looking, and therell be a snake in it every time.
you would smell them, rand said.
maybe. the sniffer inhaled deeply. but i can only smell what theyve done, not what they intend.
there was a scraping sound from over rands head, and then loial was letting himself down from the
wall. the ogier did not even have to straighten his arms completely before his boots touched the ground.
rash, he muttered. you humans are always so rash and hasty. and now you have me doing it. elder
haman would speak to me severely, and my mother . . . the darkness hid his face, but rand was sure
his ears were twitching vigorously. rand, if you dont start being a little careful, you are going to get me
in trouble.
rand walked to the waygate, walked all the way around it. even close up it looked like nothing more
than a thick square of stone, taller than he was. the back was smooth and cool to the touch  he only
brushed his hand against it quickly  but the front had been carved by an artists hands. vines, leaves,
and flowers covered it, each so finely done that in the dim moonlight they seemed almost real. he felt the
ground in front of it; the grass had been scraped partly away in two arcs such as those gates would make
in opening.
is that a waygate? hurin asked uncertainly. ive heard tell of them, of course, but . . . he sniffed the
air. the trail goes right to it and stops, lord rand. how are we going to follow them, now? ive heard if
you go through a waygate, you come out mad, if you come out at all.
it can be done, hurin. ive done it, and loial, and mat and perrin. rand never took his eyes from the
tangles of leaves on the stone. there was one unlike any other carved there, he knew. the trefoil leaf of
fabledavendesora , the tree of life. he put his hand on it. ill bet you can smell their trail along the
ways. we can follow anywhere they can run. it would not hurt to prove to himself that he could make
himself step through a waygate. ill prove it to you. he heard hurin groan. the leaf was worked in the
stone just as the others were, but it came away in his hand. loial groaned, too.
in an instant the illusion of living plants seemed suddenly real. stone leaves appeared to stir with a
breeze, flowers appeared to have color even in the dark. down the center of the mass a line appeared,
and the two halves of the slab swung slowly toward rand. he stepped back to let them open. he did not



find himself looking at the other side of the walled square, but neither did he see the dull silver reflection
he remembered. the space between the opening gates was a black so dark it seemed to make the night
around it lighter. the pitchblackness oozed out between the stillmoving gates.
rand leaped back with a shout, dropping theavendesora leaf in his haste, and loial cried out, machin
shin. the black wind.
the sound of wind filled their ears; the grass stirred in ripples toward the walls, and dirt swirled up,
sucked into the air. and in the wind a thousand insane voices seemed to cry, ten thousand, overlapping,
drowning each other. rand could make out some of them, though he tried not to.
. . .blood so sweet, so sweet to drink the blood, the blood that drips, drips, drops so red; pretty
eyes, fine eyes, i have no eyes, pluck the eyes from out of your head; grind your bones, split your
bones inside your flesh, suck your marrow while you scream; scream, scream, singing screams,
sing your screams . . . and worst of all, a whispering thread through all the rest.althor. althor.
althor.
rand found the void around him and embraced it, never minding the tantalizing, sickening glow ofsaidin
just out of his sight. greatest of all the dangers along the ways was the black wind that took the souls of
those it killed, and drove mad those it let live, butmachin shin was a part of the ways; it could not leave
them. only it was flowing into the night, and the black wind called his name.
the waygate was not yet fully open. if they could only put theavendesora leaf back . . . he saw loial
scrambling on his hands and knees, fumbling and searching the grass in the darkness.
saidinfilled him. he felt as if his bones were vibrating, felt the redhot, icecold flow of the one power,
felt truly alive as he never was without it, felt the oilslick taint . . .no! and silently he screamed back at
himself from beyond the emptiness,its coming for you! itll kill all of us! he hurled it all at the black
bulge, standing out a full span from the waygate, now. he did not know what it was that he hurled, or
how, but in the heart of that darkness bloomed a coruscating fountain of light.
the black wind shrieked, ten thousand wordless howls of agony. slowly, giving way inch by reluctant
inch, the bulge lessened; slowly the oozing reversed, back into the stillopen waygate.
the power raced through rand in a torrent. he could feel the link between himself andsaidin , like a
river in flood, between himself and the pure fire blazing in the heart of the black wind, a raging cataract.
the heat inside him went to whiteheat, and beyond, to a shimmer that would have melted stone and
vaporized steel and made the air burst into flame. the cold grew till the breath in his lungs should have
frozen solid and hard as metal. he could feel it overwhelming him, feel life eroding like a soft clay
riverbank, feel what was him wearing away.
cant stop! if it gets out. . .have to kill it!i can not stop! desperately he clung to fragments
of himself. the one power roared through him; he rode it like a chip of wood in rapids. the void began
to melt and flow; the emptiness steamed with freezing cold.
the motion of the waygate halted, and reversed.
rand stared, sure, in the dim thoughts floating outside the void, that he was only seeing what he wanted
to see.
the gates drifted closer together, pushing backmachin shin as if the black wind had solid substance.



the inferno still roared in its breast.
with a vague, distant wondering, rand saw loial, still on hands and knees, backing away from the
closing gates.
the gap narrowed, vanished. the leaves and vines merged into a solid wall, and were stone.
rand felt the link between him and the fire snap, the flow of power through him cease. a moment more,
and it would have swept him away completely. shaking, he dropped to his knees. it was still there inside.
saidin . no longer flowing, but there, in a pool. he was a pool of the one power. he trembled with it.
he could smell the grass, the dirt beneath, the stone of the walls. even in the darkness he could see each
blade of grass, separate and whole, all of them at once. he could feel each minute stirring of the air on his
face. his tongue curdled with the taste of the taint; his stomach knotted and spasmed.
frantically he clawed his way out of the void; still on his knees, not moving, he fought free. and then all
that was left was the fading foulness on his tongue, and the cramping in his stomach, and the memory.so
alive.
you saved us, builder. hurin had his back pressed against the wall, and his voice was hoarse. that
thing  that was the black wind?  it was worse than  was it going to hurl that fire at us? lord
rand! did it harm you? did it touch you? he came running as rand got to his feet, helping him the last
bit. loial was getting up, too, dusting his hands and his knees.
well never follow fain through that. rand touched loials arm. thank you. you did save us.you
saved me, at least. it was killing me. killing me, and it felt wonderful . he swallowed; a faint
trace of the taste still coated his mouth. i want something to drink.
i only found the leaf and put it back, loial said, shrugging. it seemed that if we could not get the
waygate closed, it would kill us. i am afraid im not a very good hero, rand. i was so afraid i could
hardly think.
we were both afraid, rand said. we may be a poor pair of heroes, but we are what there is. its a
good thing ingtar is with us.
lord rand, hurin said diffidently, could we  leave, now?
the sniffer made a fuss about rand going over the wall first, with not knowing who was waiting outside,
until rand pointed out that he had the only weapon among them. even then hurin did not seem to like
letting loial lift rand to catch the top of the wall and pull himself over.
rand landed on his feet with a thud, listening and peering into the night. for a moment he thought he saw
something move, heard a boot scrape on the brick walk, but neither was repeated, and he dismissed it as
nervousness. he thought that he had a right to be nervous. he turned to help hurin down.
lord rand, the sniffer said as soon as his feet were solidly on the ground, how are we going to follow
them now? from what ive heard of those things, the whole lot of them could be halfway across the
world by now, in any direction.
verin will know a way. rand suddenly wanted to laugh; to find the horn and the dagger  if they
could be found, now  he had to go back to the aes sedai. they had let him loose, and now he had to
go back. i wont let mat die without trying.



loial joined them, and they went back toward the manor, to be met at the small door by mat, who
opened it just as rand reached for the handle. verin says youre not to do anything. if hurins found
where the horn is kept, then she says thats all we can do, now. she says well leave as soon as you
come back, and make a plan. and i say this is the last time i go running back and forth with messages. if
you want to say something to somebody, you can talk to them yourself from now on. mat peered past
them into the darkness. is the horn out there somewhere? in an outbuilding? did you see the dagger?
rand turned him around and got him back inside. it isnt in an outbuilding, mat. i hope verin has a
good idea of what to do now; i dont have any.
mat looked as if he wanted to ask questions, but he let himself be pushed along the dimly lit corridor. he
even remembered to limp as they started upstairs.
when rand and the others reentered the rooms filled with nobles, they received a number of looks.
rand wondered if they somehow knew something of what had happened outside, or if he should have
sent hurin and mat to the front hall to wait, but then he realized the looks were no different from what
they had been before, curious and calculating, wondering what the lord and the ogier had been up to.
servants were invisible to these people. no one tried to approach them, since they were together. it
seemed there were protocols to conspiracy in the great game; anyone might try to listen to a private
conversation, but they would not intrude on it.
verin and ingtar were standing together, and thus also alone. ingtar looked a little dazed. verin gave
rand and the other three a brief glance, frowned at their expressions, then resettled her shawl and started
for the entry hall.
as they reached it, barthanes appeared as if someone had told him they were leaving. you go so soon?
verin sedai, can i not entreat you to stay longer?
verin shook her head. we must go, lord barthanes. ive not been in cairhien in some years. i was
glad of your invitation to young rand. it has been . . . interesting.
then grace see you safely to your inn. the great tree, is it not? perhaps you will favor me with your
presence again? you would honor me, verin sedai, and you, lord rand, and you, lord ingtar, not to
mention you, loial, son of arent son of halan. his bow was a little deeper for the aes sedai than for
the others, but still no more than a slight inclination.
verin nodded in acknowledgment. perhaps. the light illumine you, lord barthanes. she turned for
the doors.
as rand moved to follow the others, barthanes caught his sleeve with two fingers, holding him back.
mat looked as if he might stay, too, until hurin pulled him to join verin and the rest.
you wade even deeper in the game than i thought, barthanes said softly. when i heard your name, i
could not believe it, yet you came, and you fit the description, and . . . i was given a message for you. i
think i will deliver it after all.
rand had felt a prickling along his backbone as barthanes spoke, but at the last, he stared. a message?
from whom? lady selene?
a man. not the sort for whom i would usually carry messages, but he has . . . certain . . . claims on me



that i cannot ignore. he gave no name, but he was a lugarder. aaah! you know him.
i know him.fain left a message? rand looked around the wide hall. mat and verin and the others
were waiting by the doors. liveried servants stood stiffly along the walls, ready to leap at a command yet
appearing neither to hear nor see. the sounds of the gathering floated from deeper in the manor. it did
not look like a place where darkfriends might attack. what message?
he says he will wait for you on toman head. he has what you seek, and if you want it, you must
follow. if you refuse to follow him, he says he will hound your blood, and your people, and those you
love until you will face him. it sounds mad, of course, a man like that saying he will hound a lord, and yet,
there was something about him. i think he it mad  he even denied you are a lord, as any eye can plainly
see  but there is still something. what is it he carries with him, with trollocs to guard it? what is it you
seek? barthanes seemed shocked at the directness of his own questions.
the light illumine you, lord barthanes. rand managed a bow, but his legs wobbled as he joined
verin and the others.he wantsme to follow? and hell hurt emonds field, tam, if i dont . he had
no doubt fain could do it, would do it.at least egwene is safe, in the white tower . he had sickening
images of trollocs descending in hordes on emonds field, of eyeless fades stalking egwene.but how
can i follow him? how?
then he was out in the night, mounting red. verin and ingtar and the others were all already on their
horses, and the escort of shienarans was closing round them.
what did you find? verin demanded. where does he keep it? hurin cleared his throat loudly, and
loial shifted in his high saddle. the aes sedai peered at them.
fain has taken the horn to toman head through a waygate, rand said dully. by this time, hes
probably already waiting there for me.
we will speak of this later, verin said, so firmly that no one spoke at all on the ride back to the city, to
the great tree.
uno left them there, after a quiet word from ingtar, taking the soldiers back to their inn in the foregate.
hurin took one look at verins set face by the light of the common room, muttered something about ale,
and scurried to a table in a corner, alone. the aes sedai brushed aside the innkeepers solicitous hopes
that she had enjoyed herself, and silently led rand and the rest to the private dining room.
perrin looked up fromthe travels of jain farstrider when they walked in, and frowned when he saw
their faces. it didnt go well, did it? he said, closing the leatherbound book. lamps and beeswax
candles around the room gave a good light; mistress tiedra charged heavily, but she did not stint.
verin carefully folded her shawl and laid it across the back of a chair. tell me again. the darkfriends
took the horn through awaygate ? at barthaness manor?
the ground under the manor used to be an ogier grove, loial explained. when we built . . . his
voice trailed off and his ears wilted under her look.
hurin followed them right to it. rand wearily threw himself into a chair.i have to follow more than
ever, now. but how? i opened it to show him he could still follow the trail wherever they went, and the
black wind was there. it tried to reach us, but loial managed to close the gates before it could come all
the way out. he colored a little at that, but loialhad closed the gates, and for all he knewmachin shin



might have made it out without that. it was standing guard.
the black wind, mat breathed, frozen halfway into a chair. perrin was staring at rand, too. so were
verin and ingtar. mat dropped into the chair with a thump.
you must be mistaken, verin said at last. machin shincould not be used as a guard. no one can
constrain the black wind to do anything.
its a creature of the dark one, mat said numbly. theyre darkfriends. maybe they knew how to
ask it for help, or make it help.
no one knows exactly whatmachin shin is, verin said, unless, perhaps, it is the essence of madness
and cruelty. it cannot be reasoned with, mat, or bargained with, or talked to. it cannot even be forced,
not by any aes sedai living today, and perhaps not by any who ever lived. do you really think padan
fain could do what ten aes sedai could not? mat shook his head.
there was an air of despair in the room, of hope and purpose lost. the goal they had sought had
vanished, and even verins face wore a floundering expression.
id never have thought fain had the courage for the ways. ingtar sounded almost mild, but suddenly
he banged his fist against the wall. i do not care how, or even if,machin shin works on fains behalf.
they have taken the horn of valere into the ways, aes sedai. by now they could be in the blight, or
halfway to tear or tanchico, or the other side of the aiel waste. the horn is lost. i am lost. his hands
dropped to his sides, and his shoulders slumped. i am lost.
fain is taking it to toman head, rand said, and was immediately the object of all eyes again.
verin studied him narrowly. you said that before. how do you know?
he left a message with barthanes, rand said.
a trick, ingtar sneered. hed not tell us where to follow.
i dont know what the rest of you are going to do, rand said, but i am going to toman head. i have
to. i leave at first light.
but, rand, loial said, it will take us months to reach toman head. what makes you think fain will
wait there for us?
he will wait.but how long before he decides im not coming? why did he set that guard if he
wants me to follow? loial, i mean to ride as hard as i can, and if i ride red to death, ill buy another
horse, or steal another, if i have to. are you sure you want to come?
ive stayed with you this long, rand. why would i stop now? loial pulled out his pipe and pouch and
began thumbing tabac into the big bowl. you see, i like you. i would like you even if you werent
taveren . maybe i like you despite it. you do seem to get me neckdeep in hot water. in any case, i am
going with you. he sucked on the pipestem to test the draw, then took a splinter from the stone jar on
the mantel and thrust it into a candle flame for a light. and i dont think you can really stop me.
well, im going, mat said. fain still has that dagger, so im going. but all that servant business ended
tonight.



perrin sighed, an introspective look in his yellow eyes. i suppose ill come along, too. after a moment,
he grinned. somebody has to keep mat out of trouble.
not even a clever trick, ingtar muttered. somehow, ill get barthanes alone, and i will learn the truth.
i mean to have the horn of valere, not chase jak o the wisps.
it may not be a trick, verin said carefully, seeming to study the floor under her toes. there were
certain things left in the dungeons at fal dara, writings that indicated a connection between what
happened that night and  she gave rand a quick glance under lowered brows  toman head. i still
do not understand them completely, but i believe we must go to toman head. and i believe we will find
the horn there.
even if they are going to toman head, ingtar said, by the time we reach it, fain or one of the other
darkfriends could have blown the horn a hundred times, and the heroes returned from the grave will ride
for the shadow.
fain could have blown the horn a hundred times since leaving fal dara, verin told him. and i think
he would have, if he could open the chest. what we must worry about is that he might find someone who
does know how to open it. we must follow him along the ways.
perrins head came up sharply, and mat shifted in his chair. loial gave a low moan.
even if we could somehow sneak past barthaness guards, rand said, i think well findmachin shin
still there. we cannot use the ways.
how many of us could sneak onto barthaness grounds? verin said dismissively. there are other
waygates. stedding tsofu lies not far from the city, south and east. it is a youngstedding , rediscovered
only perhaps six hundred years ago, but the ogier elders were still growing the ways, then. stedding
tsofu will have a waygate. it is there and we will ride at first light.
loial made a slightly louder sound, and rand was not sure whether it referred to the waygate or the
stedding.
ingtar still did not seem convinced, but verin was as smooth and as implacable as snow sliding down a
mountainside. you will have your soldiers ready to ride, ingtar. send hurin to tell uno before he goes to
bed. i think we should all go to bed as soon as possible. these darkfriends have gained at least a day on
us already, and i mean to make up as much of it as i can tomorrow. so firm was the plump aes sedais
manner that she was already herding ingtar to the door before she finished speaking.
rand followed the others out, but at the door he stopped beside the aes sedai and watched mat
heading down the candlelit hall. why does he look like that? he asked her. i thought you healed him,
enough to give him some time, anyway.
she waited until mat and the others had turned up the stairs before speaking. apparently, it did not
work so well as we believed. the sickness takes an interesting course in him. his strength remains; he
will keep that to the end, i think. but his body wastes away. another few weeks, at most, i would say.
you see, there is reason for haste.
i do not need another spur, aes sedai, rand said, making the title sound hard.mat. the horn. fains
threat. light, egwene! burn me, i dont need another spur.



and what of you, rand althor? do you feel well? do you fight it still, or have you yet surrendered to
the wheel?
i ride with you to find the horn, he told her. beyond that, there is nothing between me and any aes
sedai. do you understand me? nothing!
she did not speak, and he walked away from her, but when he turned to take the stairs she was still
watching him, dark eyes sharp and considering.

chapter 34

the wheel weaves

the first light of morning already pearled the sky by the time thom merrilin found himself trudging back
to the bunch of grapes. even where the halls and taverns lay thickest, there was a brief time when the
foregate lay quiet, gathering its breath. in his present mood, thom would not have noticed if the empty
street had been on fire.
some of barthaness guests had insisted on keeping him long after most had gone, long after barthanes
had taken himself to bed. it had been his own fault for leavingthe great hunt of the horn , changing to
the sort of tales he told and songs he sang in the villages, mara and the three foolish kings andhow
susa tamed jain farstrider and stories of anla the wise councilor. he had meant the choices to be a
private comment on their stupidity, never dreaming any of them might listen, much less be intrigued.
intrigued in a way. they had demanded more of the same, but they had laughed in the wrong places, at
the wrong things. they had laughed at him, too, apparently thinking he would not notice, or else that a full
purse stuffed in his pocket would heal any wounds. he had almost thrown it away twice already.
the heavy purse burning his pocket and pride was not the only reason for his mood, nor even the
nobles contempt. they had asked questions about rand, not even bothering to be subtle with a mere
gleeman. why was rand in cairhien? why had an andoran lord taken him, a gleeman, aside? too many
questions. he was not sure his answers had been clever enough. his reflexes for the great game were
rusty.
before turning toward the bunch of grapes, he had gone to the great tree; it was not difficult to find
where someone was staying in cairhien, if you pressed a palm or two with silver. he was still not sure
what he had intended to say. rand was gone with his friends, and the aes sedai. it left a feeling of
something not done.the boys on his own, now. burn me, im out of it!



he strode through the common room, empty as it seldom was, and took the steps two at a time. at
least, he tried to; his right leg did not bend well, and he nearly fell. muttering to himself, he climbed the
rest of the way at a slower pace, and opened the door to his room softly, so as not to wake dena.
despite himself, he smiled when he saw her lying on the bed with her face turned to the wall, still in her
dress.fell asleep waiting for me. fool girl . but it was a kindly thought; he was not sure there was
anything she would do that he would not forgive or excuse. deciding on the spur of the moment that
tonight was the night hed let her perform for the first time, he lowered his harp case to the floor and put a
hand on her shoulder, to wake her and tell her.
she rolled limply onto her back, staring up at him, glazed eyes open wide above the gash across her
throat. the side of the bed that had been hidden by her body was dark and sodden.
thoms stomach heaved; if his throat had not been so tight he could not breathe, he would have
vomited, or screamed, or both.
he had only the creaking of wardrobe doors for warning. he spun, knives coming out of his sleeves and
leaving his hands in the same motion. the first blade took the throat of a fat, balding man with a dagger in
his hand; the man stumbled back, blood bubbling around his clutching fingers as he tried to cry out.
spinning on his bad leg threw thoms other blade off, though; the knife stuck in the right shoulder of a
heavily muscled man with scars on his face, who was climbing out of the other wardrobe. the big mans
knife dropped from a hand that suddenly would not do what he wanted, and he lumbered for the door.
before he could take a second step, thom produced another knife and slashed him across the back of
his leg. the big man yelled and stumbled, and thom seized a handful of greasy hair, slamming his face
against the wall beside the door; the man screamed again as the knife hilt sticking out of his shoulder hit
the door.
thom thrust the blade in his hand to within an inch of the mans dark eye. the scars on the big mans
face gave him a hard look, but he stared at the point without blinking and did not move a muscle. the fat
man, lying half in the wardrobe, kicked a last kick and was still.
before i kill you, thom said, tell me. why? his voice was quiet, numb; he felt numb inside.
the great game, the man said quickly. his accent was of the streets, and his clothes as well, but they
were a shade too fine, too unworn; he had more coin to spend than any foregater should. nothing
against you personal, you see? it is just the game.
the game? im not mixed up indaes daemar! who would want to kill me for the great game? the
man hesitated. thom moved his blade closer. if the fellow blinked, his eyelashes would brush the point.
who?
barthanes, came the hoarse answer. lord barthanes. we would not have killed you. barthanes
wants information. we just wanted to find out what you know. there can be gold in it for you. a nice, fat
golden crown for what you know. maybe two.
liar! i was in barthaness manor last night, as close to him as i am to you. if he wanted anything of me,
id never have left alive.
i tell you, we have been looking for you, or anyone who knows about this andoran lord, for days. i



never heard your name until last night, downstairs. lord barthanes is generous. it could be five crowns.
the man tried to pull his head away from the knife in thoms hand, and thom pushed him harder against
the wall. what andoran lord? but he knew. the light help him, he knew.
rand. of house althor. tall. young. a blademaster, or at least he wears the sword. i know he came
to see you. him and an ogier, and you talked. tell me what you know. i might even throw in a crown or
two, myself.
you fool, thom breathed.dena died for this? oh, light, shes dead . he felt as if he wanted to cry.
the boys a shepherd.a shepherd in a fancy coat, with aes sedai around him like bees around
honeyroses . just a shepherd. he tightened his grip in the mans hair.
wait! wait! you can make more than any five crowns, or even ten. a hundred, more like. every
house wants to know about this rand althor. two or three have approached me. with what you
know, and my knowing who wants to know it, we could both fill our pockets. and there has been a
woman, a lady, i have seen more than once while asking after him. if we can find out who she is . . . why,
we could sell that, too.
youve made one real mistake in it all, thom said.
mistake? the mans far hand was beginning to slide down toward his belt. no doubt he had another
dagger there. thom ignored it.
you should never have touched the girl.
the mans hand darted for his belt, then he gave one convulsive start as thoms knife went home.
thom let him fall over away from the door and stood a moment before bending tiredly to tug his blades
free. the door banged open, and he whirled with a snarl on his face.
zera jerked back, a hand to her throat, staring at him. that fool ella just told me, she said unsteadily,
that two of barthaness men were asking after you last night, and with what ive heard this morning . . . i
thought you said you didnt play in the game anymore.
they found me, he said wearily.
her eyes dropped from his face and widened as they took in the bodies of the two men. hastily she
stepped into the room, shutting the door behind her. this is bad, thom. youll have to leave cairhien.
her gaze fell on the bed, and her breath caught. oh, no. oh, no. oh, thom, im so sorry.
i cannot leave yet, zera. he hesitated, then tenderly drew a blanket over dena, covering her face. i
have another man to kill, first.
the innkeeper gave herself a shake and pulled her eyes away from the bed. her voice was more than a
little breathy. if you mean barthanes, youre too late. everybodys talking about it already. he is dead.
his servants found him this morning, torn to pieces in his bedchamber. the only way they knew it was
him was his head stuck on a spike over the fireplace. she laid a hand on his arm. thom, you cant hide
that you were there last night, not from anybody who wants to know. add these two in, and theres
nobody in cairhien who wont believe you were involved. there was a slight questioning note in her last
words, as if she, too, were wondering.



it doesnt matter, i suppose, he said dully. he could not stop looking down at the blanketcovered
shape on the bed. perhaps i will go back to andor. to caemlyn.
she took his shoulders, turning him away from the bed. you men, she sighed, always thinking with
either your muscles or your hearts, and never your heads. caemlyn is as bad as cairhien, for you. either
place, youll end up dead, or in prison. do you think shed want that? if you want to honor her memory,
stay alive.
will you take care of . . . he could not say it.growing old , he thought.going soft . he pulled the
heavy purse from his pocket and folded her hands around it. this should take care of . . . everything.
and help when they start asking questions about me, too.
i will see to everything, she said gently. you must go, thom. now.
he nodded reluctantly, and slowly began stuffing a few things in a set of saddlebags. while he worked,
zera got her first close look at the fat man sprawled partway in the wardrobe, and she gave a loud gasp.
he looked at her inquiringly; as long as he had known her, she had never been one to go faint over
blood.
these arent barthaness men, thom. at least, that one isnt. she nodded toward the fat man. its the
worst kept secret in cairhien that he works for house riatin. for galldrian.
galldrian, he said flatly.what has that bloody shepherd gotten me into? what have the aes sedai
gotten us both into? but it was galldrians men murdered her.
there must have been something of his thoughts on his face. zera said sharply, dena wants you alive,
you fool! you try to kill the king, and youll be dead before you get within a hundred spans of him, if you
come that close!
a roar came from the city walls, as if half of cairhien were shouting. frowning, thom peered from his
window. beyond the top of the gray walls above the rooftops of the foregate, a thick column of smoke
was rising into the sky. far beyond the walls. beside the first black pillar, a few gray tendrils quickly
grew into another, and more wisps appeared further on. he estimated the distance and took a deep
breath.
perhaps you had better think about leaving, too. it looks as if someone is firing the granaries.
i have lived through riots before. go now, thom. with a last look at denas shrouded form, he
gathered his things, but as he started to leave, zera spoke again. you have a dangerous look in your
eyes, thom merrilin. imagine dena sitting here, alive and hale. think what she would say. would she let
you go off and get yourself killed to no purpose?
im only an old gleeman, he said from the door.and rand althor is only a shepherd, but we both
do what we must . who could i possibly be dangerous to?
as he pulled the door to, hiding her, hiding dena, a mirthless, wolfish grin came onto his face. his leg
hurt, but he barely felt it as he hurried purposefully down the stairs and out of the inn.



padan fain reined in his horse atop a hill above falme, in one of the few sparse thickets remaining on the
hills outside the town. the packhorse bearing his precious burden bumped his leg, and he kicked it in the
ribs without looking; the animal snorted and jerked back to the end of the lead he had tied to his saddle.
the woman had not wanted to give up her horse, no more than any of the darkfriends who had followed
him had wanted to be left alone in the hills with the trollocs, without fains protecting presence. he had
solved both problems easily. meat in a trolloc cookpot had no need of a horse. the womans
companions had been shaken by the journey along the ways, to a waygate outside a longabandoned
stedding on toman head, and watching the trollocs prepare their dinner had made the surviving
darkfriends extremely biddable.
from the edge of the trees, fain studied the unwalled town and sneered. one short merchant train was
rumbling in among the stables and horse lots and wagon yards that bordered the town, while another
rumbled out, raising little dust from dirt packed by many years of such traffic. the men driving the
wagons and the few riding beside them were all local men by their clothing, yet the mounted men, at least,
had swords on baldrics, and even a few spears and bows. the soldiers he saw, and there were few, did
not seem to be watching the armed men they had supposedly conquered.
he had learned something of these people, these seanchan, in his day and a night on toman head. at
least, as much as the defeated folk knew. it was never hard to find someone alone, and they always
answered questions properly put. men gathered more information on the invaders, as if they actually
believed they would eventually do something with what they knew, but they sometimes tried to hold
back. women, by and large, seemed interested in going on with their lives whoever their rulers were, yet
they noted details men did not, and they talked more quickly once they stopped screaming. children
talked the quickest of all, but they seldom said much that was worthwhile.
he had discarded three quarters of what he had heard as nonsense and rumors growing into fables, but
he took some of those conclusions back, now. anyone at all could enter falme, it appeared. with a
start, he saw the truth of a little more nonsense as twenty soldiers rode out of the town. he could not
make out their mounts clearly, but they were certainly not horses. they ran with a fluid grace, and their
dark skins seemed to have a glint in the morning sun, as of scales. he craned his neck to watch them
disappear inland, then booted his horse toward the town.
the local folk among the stables and parked wagons and fenced horse lots gave him no more than a
glance or two. he had no interest in them, either; he rode on into the town, onto its cobblestone streets
sloping down to the harbor. he could see the harbor clearly, and the large, oddly shaped seanchan ships
anchored there. no one bothered him as he searched streets that were neither crowded nor empty.
there were more seanchan soldiers here. the people hurried about their business with eyes down,
bowing whenever soldiers passed, but the seanchan paid them no mind. it all seemed peaceful on the
surface, despite the armored seanchan in the streets and the ships in the harbor, but fain could sense the
tension underneath. he always did well where men were tense and afraid.
he came to a large house with more than a dozen soldiers standing guard before it. fain stopped and
dismounted. except for one obvious officer, most wore armor of unrelieved black, and their helmets
made him think of locusts heads. two leatheryskinned beasts with three eyes and horny beaks instead
of mouths flanked the front door, squatting like crouching frogs; the soldier standing by each of the
creatures had three eyes painted on the breast of his armor. fain eyed the bluebordered banner flapping
above the roof, the spreadwinged hawk clutching lightning bolts, and chortled inside himself.
women went in and out of a house across the street, women linked by silver leashes, but he ignored
them. he knew aboutdamane from the villagers. they might be of some use later, but not now.



the soldiers were looking at him, especially the officer, whose armor was all gold and red and green.
forcing an ingratiating smile onto his face, fain made himself bow deeply. my lords, i have something
here that will interest your great lord. i assure you, he will want to see it, and me, personally. he
gestured to the squarish shape on his packhorse, still wrapped in the huge, striped blanket in which his
people had found it.
the officer stared him up and down. you sound a foreigner to this land. have you taken the oaths?
i obey, await, and will serve, fain replied smoothly. everyone he had questioned spoke of the oaths,
though none had understood what they meant. if these people wanted oaths, he was prepared to swear
anything. he had long since lost count of the oaths he had taken.
the officer motioned two of his men to see what was under the blanket. surprised grunts at the weight
as they lifted it down from the packsaddle turned to gasps when they stripped the blanket away. the
officer stared with no expression on his face at the silverworked golden chest resting on the
cobblestones, then looked at fain. a gift fit for the empress herself. you will come with me.
one of the soldiers searched fain roughly, but he endured it in silence, noting that the officer and the two
soldiers who took up the chest surrendered their swords and daggers before going inside. anything he
could learn of these people, however small, might help, though he was confident of his plan already. he
was always confident, but never more than where lords feared an assassins knife from their own
followers.
as they went through the door, the officer frowned at him, and for a moment fain wondered why.of
course. the beasts . whatever they were, they were certainly no worse than trollocs, nothing at all
beside a myrddraal, and he had not given them a second look. it was too late to pretend to be afraid of
them now. but the seanchan said nothing, only led him deeper into the house.
and so fain found himself on his face, in a room bare of furnishings except for folding screens that hid its
walls, while the officer told the high lord turak of him and his offering. servants brought a table on
which to set the chest so the high lord would have no need to stoop; all fain saw of them were
scurrying slippers. he bided his time impatiently. eventually there would come a time when he was not
the one to bow.
then the soldiers were dismissed, and fain told to rise. he did so slowly, studying both the high lord,
with his shaven head and his long fingernails and his blue silk robe brocaded with blossoms, and the man
who stood beside him with the unshaven half of his pale hair in a long braid. fain was sure the fellow in
green was only a servant, however great, but servants could be useful, especially if they stood high in
their masters sight.
a marvelous gift. turaks eyes lifted from the chest to fain. a scent of roses wafted from the high
lord. yet the question asks itself; how did one like you come by a chest many lesser lords could not
afford? are you a thief?
fain tugged at his worn, none too clean coat. it is sometimes necessary for a man to appear less than
he is, high lord. my present shabbiness allowed me to bring this to you unmolested. this chest is old,
high lord  as old as the age of legends  and within it lies a treasure such as few eyes have ever
seen. soon  very soon, high lord  i will be able to open it, and give you that which will enable you
to take this land as far as you wish, to the spine of the world, the aiel waste, the lands beyond. nothing
will stand against you, high lord, once i   he cut off as turak began running his longnailed fingers



over the chest.
i have seen chests such as this, chests from the age of legends, the high lord said, though none so
fine. they are meant to be opened only by those who know the pattern, but i  ah! he pressed among
the ornate whorls and bosses, there was a sharp click, and he lifted back the lid. a flicker of what might
have been disappointment passed across his face.
fain bit the inside of his mouth till blood came to keep from snarling. it lessened his bargaining position
that he was not the one who had opened the chest. still, all the rest could go as he had planned if he
could only make himself be patient. but he had been patient so long.
these are treasure from the age of legends? turak said, lifting out the curled horn in one hand and
the curved dagger with the ruby in its golden hilt in the other. fain clutched his hands in fists at his sides
so he would not grab the dagger. the age of legends, turak repeated softly, tracing the silver script
inlaid around the golden bell of the horn with the tip of the daggers blade. his brows rose in startlement,
the first open expression fain had seen from him, but in the next instant turaks face was as smooth as
ever. do you have any idea what this is?
the horn of valere, high lord, fain said smoothly, pleased to see the mouth of the man with the
braid drop open. turak only nodded as if to himself.
the high lord turned away. fain blinked and opened his mouth, then, at a sharp gesture from the
yellowhaired man, followed without speaking.
it was another room with all the original furnishings gone, replaced by folding screens and a single chair
facing a tall round cabinet. still holding the horn and the dagger, turak looked at the cabinet, then away.
he said nothing, but the other seanchan snapped quick orders, and in moments men in plain woolen
robes appeared through a door behind the screens bearing another small table. a young woman with hair
so pale it was almost white came behind them, her arms full of small stands of polished wood in various
sizes and shapes. her garment was white silk, and so thin that fain could see her body clearly through it,
but he had eyes only for the dagger. the horn was a means to an end, but the dagger was a part of him.
turak briefly touched one of the wooden stands the girl held, and she placed it on the center of the table.
the men turned the chair to face it under the direction of the man with the braid. the lower servants hair
hung to their shoulders. they scurried out with bows that almost put their heads on their knees.
placing the horn on the stand so that it stood upright, turak laid the dagger on the table in front of it and
went to sit in the chair.
fain could stand it no longer. he reached for the dagger.
the yellowhaired man caught his wrist in a crushing grip. unshaven dog! know that the hand that
touches the property of the high lord unbidden is cut off.
it is mine, fain growled.patience! so long.
turak, lounging back in the chair, lifted one bluelacquered fingernail, and fain was pulled out of the
way so the high lord could view the horn unobstructed.
yours? turak said. inside a chest you could not open? if you interest me sufficiently, i may give you
the dagger. even if it is from the age of legends, i have no interest in such as that. before all else, you



will answer me a question. why have you brought the horn of valere to me?
fain eyed the dagger longingly a moment more, then jerked his wrist free and rubbed it as he bowed.
that you may sound it, high lord. then you may take all of this land, if you wish. all of the world. you
may break the white tower and grind the aes sedai to dust, for even their powers cannot stop heroes
come back from the dead.
iam to sound it. turaks tone was flat. and break the white tower. again, why? you claim to obey,
await, and serve, but this is a land of oathbreakers. why do you give your land to me? do you have
some private quarrel with these . . . women?
fain tried to make his voice convincing.patient, like a worm boring from within . high lord, my
family has passed down a tradition, generation upon generation. we served the high king, artur
paendrag tanreall, and when he was murdered by the witches of tar valon, we did not abandon our
oaths. when others warred and tore apart what artur hawkwing had made, we held to our swearing,
and suffered for it, but held to it still. this is our tradition, high lord, handed father to son, and mother to
daughter, down all the years since the high king was murdered. that we await the return of the armies
artur hawkwing sent across the aryth ocean, that we await the return of artur hawkwings blood to
destroy the white tower and take back what was the high kings. and when the hawkwings blood
returns, we will serve and advise, as we did for the high king. high lord, except for its border, the
banner that flies over this roof is the banner of luthair, the son artur paendrag tanreall sent with his
armies across the ocean. fain dropped to his knees, giving a good imitation of being overwhelmed.
high lord, i wish only to serve and advise the blood of the high king.
turak was silent so long that fain began to wonder if he needed further convincing; he was ready with
more, as much as was required. finally, though, the high lord spoke. you seem to know what none,
neither the high nor the low, has spoken since sighting this land. the people here speak it as one rumor
among ten, but you know. i can see it in your eyes, hear it in your voice. i could almost think you were
sent to entangle me in a trap. but who, possessing the horn of valere, would use it so? none of those of
the blood who came with thehailene could have had the horn, for the legend says it was hidden in this
land. and surely any lord of this land would use it against me rather than put it in my hands. how did you
come to possess the horn of valere? do you claim to be a hero, as in the legend? have you done
valorous deeds?
i am no hero, high lord. fain ventured a selfdeprecating smile, but turaks face did not alter, and he
let it go. the horn was found by an ancestor of mine during the turmoil after the high kings death. he
knew how to open the chest, but that secret died with him in the war of the hundred years, that rent
artur hawkwings empire, so that all we who followed him knew was that the horn lay within and we
must keep it safe until the high kings blood returned.
almost could i believe you.
believe, high lord. once you sound the horn  
do not ruin what convincing you have managed to do. i shall not sound the horn of valere. when i
return to seanchan, i shall present it to the empress as the chiefest of my trophies. perhaps the empress
will sound it herself.
but, high lord, fain protested, you must   he found himself lying on his side, his head ringing.
only when his eyes cleared did he see the man with the pale braid rubbing his knuckles and realize what
had happened.



some words, the fellow said softly, are never used to the high lord.
fain decided how the man was going to die.
turak looked from fain to the horn as placidly as if he had seen nothing. perhaps i will give you to the
empress along with the horn of valere. she might find you amusing, a man who claims his family held
true where all others broke their oaths or forgot them.
fain hid his sudden elation in the act of climbing back to his feet. he had not even known of the
existence of an empress until turak mentioned her, but access to a ruler again . . . that opened new
paths, new plans. access to a ruler with the might of the seanchan beneath her and the horn of valere in
her hands. much better than making this turak a great king, he could wait for some parts of his plan.
softly. mustnt let him know how much you want it. after so long, a little more patience will not
hurt . as the high lord wishes, he said, trying to sound like a man who only wanted to serve.
you seem almost eager, turak said, and fain barely suppressed a wince. i will tell you why i will not
sound the horn of valere, or even keep it, and perhaps that will cure your eagerness. i do not wish a gift
of mine to offend the empress by his actions; if your eagerness cannot be cured, it will never be satisfied,
for you will never leave these shores. do you know that whoever blows the horn of valere is linked to it
thereafter? that so long as he or she lives, it is no more than a horn to any other? he did not sound as if
he expected answers, and in any case, he did not pause for them. i stand twelfth in line of succession to
the crystal throne. if i kept the horn of valere, all between myself and the throne would think i meant
to be first hereafter, and while the empress, of course, wishes that we contend with one another so that
the strongest and most cunning will follow her, she currently favors her second daughter, and she would
not look well on any threat to tuon. if i sounded it, even if i then laid this land at her feet, and every
woman in the white tower leashed, the empress, may she live forever, would surely believe i meant to
be more than merely her heir.
fain stopped himself short of suggesting how possible that would be with the aid of the horn. something
in the high lords voice suggested  as hard as fain found it to believe  that he actually meant his
wish for her to live forever.i must be patient. a worm in the root.
the empresss listeners may be anywhere, turak continued. they may be anyone. huan was born
and raised in the house of aladon, and his family for eleven generations before him, yet even he could be
a listener. the man with the braid half made a protesting gesture, before jerking himself back to
stillness. even a high lord or a high lady can find their deepest secrets known to listeners, can wake to
find themselves already handed over to the seekers for truth. truth is always difficult to find, but the
seekers spare no pain in their search, and they will search as long as they think there is need. they make
great efforts not to allow a high lord or high lady to die in their care, of course, for no mans hand may
slay one in whose veins flows the blood of artur hawkwing. if the empress must order such a death, the
unfortunate one is placed alive in a silken bag, and that bag hung over the side of the tower of the
ravens and left there until it rots away. no such care would be taken for one such as you. at the court
of the nine moons, in seandar, one such as you could be given to the seekers for a shift of your eye, for
a misspoken word, for a whim. are you still eager?
fain managed a tremble in his knees. i wish only to serve and advise, high lord. i know much that
may be useful. this court of seandar sounded a place where his plans and skills would find fertile soil.
until i sail back to seanchan, you will amuse me with your tales of your family and its tradition. it is a
relief to find a second man in this lightforsaken land who can amuse me, even if you both tell lies, as i



suspect. you may leave me. no other word was spoken, but the girl with the nearly white hair and the
almosttransparent robe appeared on quick feet to kneel with downcast head beside the high lord,
offering a single steaming cup on a lacquered tray.
high lord, fain said. the man with the braid, huan, took hold of his arm, but he pulled loose. huans
mouth tightened angrily as fain made his deepest bow yet.i will kill him slowly, yes . high lord, there
are those who follow me. they mean to take the horn of valere. darkfriends and worse, high lord, and
they cannot be more than a day or two behind me.
turak took a sip of black liquid from the thin cup balanced on longnailed fingertips. few darkfriends
remain in seanchan. those who survive the seekers for truth meet the axe of the headsman. it might be
amusing to meet a darkfriend.
high lord, they are dangerous. they have trollocs with them. they are led by one who calls himself
rand althor. a young man, but vile in the shadow beyond belief, with a lying, devious tongue. in many
places he has claimed to be many things, but always the trollocs come when he is there, high lord.
always the trollocs come . . . and kill.
trollocs, turak mused. there were no trollocs in seanchan. but the armies of the night had other
allies. other things. i have often wondered if agrolm could kill a trolloc. i will have watch kept for your
trollocs and your darkfriends, if they are not another lie. this land wearies me with boredom. he
sighed and inhaled the fumes from his cup.
fain let the grimacing huan pull him out of the room, hardly even listening to the snarled lecture on what
would happen if he ever again failed to leave lord turaks presence when given permission to do so. he
barely noticed when he was pushed into the street with a coin and instructions to return on the morrow.
rand althor was his, now.i will see him dead at last. and then the world will pay for what was
done to me.
giggling under his breath, he led his horses down into the town in search of an inn.

chapter 35

stedding tsofu

the river hills on which the city of cairhien stood gave way to flatter lands and forests when rand and
the others had ridden half a day, the shienarans still with their armor on the packhorses. there were no
roads where they went, only a scattering of cart tracks, and few farms or villages. verin pressed for
speed, and ingtar  grumbling constantly that they were letting themselves be tricked, that fain would



never have told them where he was really going, yet grumbling at the same time about riding in the
opposite direction from toman head, as if part of him believed and toman head were not months away
except by the way they took  ingtar obliged her. the gray owl banner flew on the wind of their
passage.
rand rode with grim determination, avoiding conversation with verin. he had this thing to do  this
duty, ingtar would have called it  and then he could be free of aes sedai once and for all. perrin
seemed to share something of his mood, staring straight ahead at nothing as they rode. when they finally
stopped for the night at the edge of a forest, with full dark almost on them, perrin asked loial questions
about thestedding . trollocs would not enter astedding ; would wolves? loial replied shortly that it was
only creatures of the shadow that were reluctant to enterstedding . and aes sedai, of course, since they
could not touch the true source inside astedding , or channel the one power. the ogier himself
appeared the most reluctant of all to go to stedding tsofu. mat was the only one who seemed eager,
almost desperately so. his skin looked as if he had not seen the sun in a year, and his cheeks had begun
to go hollow, though he said he felt ready to run a footrace. verin put her hands on him for healing
before he rolled into his blankets, and again before they mounted their horses in the morning, but it made
no difference in how he looked. even hurin frowned when he looked at mat.
the sun stood high on the second day when verin suddenly sat up straight in her saddle and looked
around. beside her, ingtar gave a start.
rand could not see anything different about the forest now surrounding them. the undergrowth was not
too thick; they had found an easy way under the canopy of oak and hickory, blackgum and beech,
pierced here and there by a tall pine or leatherleaf, or the white slash of a paperbark. but as he followed
them, he suddenly felt a chill pass through him, as though he had leaped into a waterwood pond in
winter. it flashed through him and was gone, leaving behind a feeling of refreshment. and there was a dull
and distant sense of loss, too, though he could not imagine of what.
every rider, as he reached that point, gave a jerk or made some exclamation. hurins mouth dropped
open, and uno whispered, bloody, flaming . . . then he shook his head as if he could not think of
anything else to say. there was a look of recognition in perrins yellow eyes.
loial took a deep, slow breath and let it out. it feels . . . good . . . to be back in astedding ,
frowning, rand looked around. he had expected astedding to be somehow different, but except for
that one chill, the forest was the same as what they had been riding through all day. there was the sudden
sense of being rested, of course. then an ogier stepped out from behind an oak.
she was shorter than loial  which meant she stood head and shoulders taller than rand  but with
the same broad nose and big eyes, the same wide mouth and tufted ears. her eyebrows were not so long
as loials, though, and her features seemed delicate beside his, the tufts on her ears finer. she wore a
long green dress and a green cloak embroidered with flowers, and carried a bunch of silverbell blossoms
as if she had been gathering them. she looked at them calmly, waiting.
loial scrambled down from his tall horse and bowed hastily. rand and the others did the same, if not so
quickly as loial; even verin inclined her head. loial gave their names formally, but he did not mention the
name of hisstedding.
for a moment the ogier girl  rand was sure she was no older than loial  studied them, then
smiled. be welcome to stedding tsofu. her voice was a lighter version of loials, too; the softer
rumble of a smaller bumblebee. i am erith, daughter of iva daughter of alar. be welcome. we have had



so few human visitors since the stonemasons left cairhien, and now so many at once. why, we even had
some of the traveling people, though, of course, they left when the . . . oh, i talk too much. i will take
you to the elders. only . . . she searched among them for the one in charge, and settled finally on verin.
aes sedai, you have so many men with you, and armed. could you please leave some of them outside?
forgive me, but it is always unsettling to have very many armed humans in thestedding at once.
of course, erith, verin said. ingtar, will you see to it?
ingtar gave orders to uno, and so it was that he and hurin were the only shienarans to follow erith
deeper into thestedding.
leading his horse like the others, rand looked up as loial came closer, with many glances at erith up
ahead with verin and ingtar. hurin walked midway between, staring around in amazement, though rand
was not sure at what exactly. loial bent to speak quietly. is she not beautiful, rand? and her voice
sings.
mat snickered, but when loial looked at him questioningly, he said, very pretty, loial. a little tall for
my taste, you understand, but very pretty, im sure.
loial frowned uncertainly, but nodded. yes, she is. his expression lightened. it does feel good to be
back in astedding . not that the longing was taking me, you understand.
the longing? perrin said. i do not understand, loial.
we ogier are bound to thestedding , perrin. it is said that before the breaking of the world, we could
go where we wished for as long as we wished, like you humans, but that changed with the breaking.
ogier were scattered like every other people, and they could not find any of thestedding again.
everything was moved, everything changed. mountains, rivers, even the seas.
everybody knows about the breaking, mat said impatiently. what does it have to do with this  this
longing?
it was during the exile, while we wandered lost, that the longing first came on us. the desire to know
thestedding once more, to know our homes again. many died of it. loial shook his head sadly. more
died than lived. when we finally began to find thestedding again, one at a time, in the years of the
covenant of the ten nations, it seemed we had defeated the longing at last, but it had changed us, put
seeds in us. now, if an ogier is outside too long, the longing comes again; he begins to weaken, and he
dies if he does not return.
do you need to stay here awhile? rand asked anxiously. theres no need to kill yourself to go with
us.
i will know it when it comes. loial laughed. it will be long before it is strong enough to cause harm to
me. why, dalar spent ten years among the sea folk without ever seeing astedding , and she came safely
home.
an ogier woman appeared out of the trees, pausing a moment to speak with erith and verin. she
looked ingtar up and down and seemed to dismiss him, which made him blink. her eyes swept across
loial, flicked over hurin and the emonds fielders, before she went off into the forest again; loial
seemed to be trying to hide behind his horse. besides, he said, peering cautiously across his saddle
after her, it is a dull life in thestedding compared to traveling with threetaveren .



if you are going to start that again, mat muttered, and loial spoke up quickly. three friends, then.
you are my friends, i hope.
i am, rand said simply, and perrin nodded.
mat laughed. how could i not be friends with somebody who dices so badly? he threw up his hands
when rand and perrin looked at him. oh, all right. i like you, loial. youre my friend. just dont go on
about . . . aaah! sometimes youre as bad to be around as rand. his voice sank to a mutter. at least
were safe here in astedding .
rand grimaced. he knew what mat meant. here in astedding , where i cant channel.
perrin punched mats shoulder, but looked sorry that he had when mat grimaced at him with that gaunt
face.
it was the music rand became aware of first, unseen flutes and fiddles in a jolly tune that floated through
the trees, and deep voices singing and laughing.

clear the field, smooth it low.
let no weed or stubble stand.
here we labor, here we toil,
here the towering trees will grow.

almost at the same moment he realized that the huge shape he was seeing through the trees was itself a
tree, with a ridged, buttressed trunk that must have been twenty paces thick. gaping, he followed it up
with his eyes, up through the forest canopy, to branches spreading like the top of a gigantic mushroom a
good hundred paces above the ground. and beyond it were taller still.
burn me, mat breathed. you could build ten houses from just one of those. fifty houses.
cut down a great tree? loial sounded scandalized, and more than a little angry. his ears were stiff
and still, his long eyebrows down on his cheeks. we never cut down one of the great trees, not unless
it dies, and they almost never do. few survived the breaking, but some of the largest were seedlings
during the age of legends.
im sorry, mat said. i was just saying how big they are. i wont hurt your trees. loial nodded,
seeming mollified.
more ogier appeared now, walking among the trees. most seemed intent on whatever they were about;
though all looked at the newcomers, and even gave a friendly nod or a small bow, none stopped or
spoke. they had a curious way of moving, in some manner blending a careful deliberateness with an
almost childlike carefree joyfulness. they knew and liked who and what they were and where they were,
and they seemed at peace with themselves and everything around them. rand found himself envying
them.
few of the ogier men were any taller than loial, but it was easy to pick out the older men; one and all
they wore mustaches as long as their dangling eyebrows and narrow beards under their chins. all of the
younger were smoothshaven, like loial. many of the men were in their shirtsleeves, and carried shovels



and mattocks or saws and buckets of pitch; the others wore plain coats that buttoned to the neck and
flared about their knees like kilts. the women seemed to favor embroidered flowers, and many wore
flowers in their hair, too. the embroidery was limited to the cloaks of the younger women; the older
womens dresses were embroidered, as well, and some women with gray hair had flowers and vines
from neck to hem. a handful of the ogier, women and girls for the most part, did seem to take special
notice of loial; he walked staring straight ahead, ears twitching more wildly the further they went.
rand was startled to see an ogier apparently walking up out of the ground, out of one of the grassy,
wildflowercovered mounds that lay scattered all among the trees here. then he saw windows in the
mounds, and an ogier woman standing at one apparently rolling a piecrust, and realized he was looking
at ogier houses. the window frames were stone, but they not only seemed natural formations, they
appeared to have been sculpted by wind and water over generations.
the great trees, with their massive trunks and spreading roots as thick as horses, needed a great deal
of room between them, but several grew right in the town. dirt ramps took the paths over the roots. in
fact, aside from the pathways, the only way to tell town from forest at a glance was a large open space in
the center of the town, around what could only be the stump of one of the great trees. nearly a hundred
paces across, its surface was polished as smooth as any floor, and there were steps built up to it at
several places. rand was imagining how tall that tree had been when erith spoke loudly enough for them
all to hear.
here come our other guests.
three human women came walking around the side of the huge stump. the youngest was carrying a
wooden bowl.
aiel, ingtar said. maidens of the spear. as well idid leave masema with the others. yet he stepped
away from verin and erith, and reached over his shoulder to loosen his sword in its scabbard.
rand studied the aiel with an uneasy curiosity. they were what too many people had tired to tell him he
was. two of the women were mature, the other little more than a girl, but all three were tall for women.
their shortcut hair ranged from a reddish brown to almost golden, with a narrow, shoulderlength tail left
long at the back. they wore loose breeches tucked into soft boots, and all their clothes were some shade
of brown or gray or green; he thought the garments would fade into rock or woods almost as well as a
warders cloak. short bows poked over their shoulders, quivers and long knives hung at their belts, and
each carried a small, round shield of hide and a cluster of spears with short shafts and long points. even
the youngest moved with a grace that suggested she knew how to use the weapons she carried.
abruptly the women became aware of the other humans; they seemed as startled at being startled as
they did at the sight of rand and the others, but they moved like lightning. the youngest one shouted,
shienarans! and turned to set the bowl carefully behind her. the other two quickly lifted brown cloths
from around their shoulders, wrapping them around their heads instead. the older women were raising
black veils across their faces, hiding everything but their eyes, and the youngest straightened to imitate
them. crouching low, they advanced at a deliberate pace, shields held forward with their clusters of
spears, except for the one each woman held ready in her other hand.
ingtars sword came out of its sheath. stand clear, aes sedai. erith, stand clear. hurin snatched out
his swordbreaker, wavered between cudgel and sword for his other hand; after another glance at the
aiels spears, he chose the sword.
you must not, the ogier girl protested. wringing her hands, she turned from ingtar to the aiel and



back. you must not.
rand realized the heronmark blade was in his hands. perrin had his axe half out of the loop at his belt
and was hesitating, shaking his head.
are you two crazy? mat demanded. his bow still slanted across his back. i dont care if they are
aiel, theyre women.
stop this! verin demanded. stop this immediately! the aiel never broke stride, and the aes sedai
clenched her fists in frustration.
mat moved back to put a foot in his stirrup. im leaving, he announced. you hear me? im not staying
to let them stick those things in me, and i am not going to shoot a woman!
the pact! loial was shouting. remember the pact! it had no more effect than the continued pleas
from verin and erith.
rand noticed that both the aes sedai and the ogier girl were keeping well out of the aiels way. he
wondered if mat had the right idea. he was not sure he could hurt a woman even if she was trying to kill
him. what decided him was the thought that even if he did manage to reach reds saddle, the aiel were
now no more than thirty paces away. he suspected those short spears could be thrown that far. as the
women came closer, still crouching; spears ready, he stopped worrying about not hurting them and began
worrying about how to stop them from hurting him.
nervously, he sought the void, and it came. and the distant thought floated outside it that it was only the
void. the glow ofsaidin was not there. the emptiness was more empty than he ever remembered,
vaster, like a hunger great enough to consume him. a hunger for more; there wassupposed to be
something more.
abruptly an ogier strode in between the two groups, his narrow beard quivering. what is the meaning
of this? put up your weapons. he sounded scandalized. for you  his glare took in ingtar and hurin,
rand and perrin, and did not spare mat for all his empty hands  there is some excuse, but for you 
 he rounded on the aiel women, who had stopped their advance. have you forgotten the pact?
the women uncovered their heads and faces so hastily that it seemed they were trying to pretend they
had never been covered. the girls face was bright red, and the other women looked abashed. one of
the older women, the one with the reddish hair, said, forgive us, treebrother. we remember the pact,
and we would not have bared steel, but we are in the land of the treekillers, where every hand is against
us, and we saw armed men. her eyes were gray, rand saw, like his own.
you are in astedding , rhian, the ogier said gently. everyone is safe in thestedding , little sister.
there is no fighting here, and no hand raised against another. she nodded, ashamed, and the ogier
looked at ingtar and the others.
ingtar sheathed his sword, and rand did the same, though not so quickly as hurin, who looked almost
as embarrassed as the aiel. perrin had never gotten his axe all the way out. as he took hand from hilt,
rand let the void go, too, and shivered. the void went, but it left behind a slowly fading echo of the
emptiness all through him, and a desire for something to fill it.
the ogier turned to verin and bowed. aes sedai, i am juin, son of lacel son of laud. i have come to
take you to the elders. they would know why an aes sedai comes among us, with armed men and one



of our own youths. loial hunched his shoulders as if trying to disappear.
verin gave the aiel a regretful look, as if she wanted to talk with them, then motioned juin to lead, and
he took her away without another word or even the first look at loial.
for a few moments, rand and the others stood facing the three aiel women uneasily. at least, rand
knew he was uneasy. ingtar seemed steady as a stone, with no more expression than one. the aiel might
have unveiled their faces, but they still had spears in their hands, and they studied the four men as though
trying to see inside them. rand in particular received increasingly angry looks. he heard the youngest
woman mutter, he is wearing a sword, in tones of mingled horror and contempt. then the three were
leaving, stopping to retrieve the wooden bowl and looking over their shoulders at rand and the others
until they vanished among the trees.
maidens of the spear, ingtar muttered. i never thought theyd stop once they veiled their faces.
certainly not for a few words. he looked at rand and his two friends. you should see a charge by
red shields, or stone dogs. as easy to stop as an avalanche.
they would not break the pact once it was recalled to them, erith said, smiling. they came for sung
wood. a note of pride entered her voice. we have two treesingers in stedding tsofu. they are rare,
now. i have heard that stedding shangtai has a young treesinger who is very talented, but we have two.
loial blushed, but she did not appear to notice. if you will come with me, i will show you where you
may wait until the elders have spoken.
as they followed her, perrin murmured, sung wood, my left foot. those aiel are searching for he who
comes with the dawn.
and mat added dryly, theyre looking for you, rand.
for me! that is crazy. what makes you think  
he cut off as erith showed them down the steps of a wildflowercovered house apparently set aside for
human guests. the rooms were twenty paces from stone wall to stone wall, with painted ceilings a good
two spans above the floor, but the ogier had done their best making something that would be
comfortable for humans. even so, the furniture was a little too large for comfort, the chairs tall enough to
lift a mans heels off the floor, the table higher than rands waist. hurin, at least, could have walked erect
into the stone fireplace, which seemed to have been worn by water rather than made by hands. erith
eyed loial doubtfully, but he waved away her concern and pulled one of the chairs into the corner least
easily seen from the door.
as soon as the ogier girl left, rand got mat and perrin over to one side. what do you mean theyre
looking for me? why? for what reason? they looked right at me, and went away.
they looked at you, mat said with a grin, like you hadnt bathed in a month, and had doused yourself
with sheepdip besides. his grin faded. but they could be looking for you. we met another aiel.
rand listened in growing amazement to their tale of the meeting in kinslayers dagger. mat told most of
it, with perrin putting in a correcting word now and again when he embellished too much. mat made a
great show of how dangerous the aielman had been, and how close the meeting had come to a fight.
and since youre the only aiel we know, he finished, well, it could be you. ingtar says aiel never live
outside the waste, so you must be the only one.



i dont think thats funny, mat, rand growled. i am not an aiel.the amyrlin said you are. ingtar
thinks you are. tam said . . .he was sick, fevered . they had severed the roots he had thought he had,
the aes sedai and tam between them, though tam had been too sick to know what he was saying. they
had cut him loose to tumble before the wind, then offered him something new to hold on to. false
dragon. aiel. he could not claim those for roots. he would not. maybe i dont belong to anyone. but
the two rivers is the only home i know.
i didnt mean anything, mat protested. its just . . . burn me, ingtar says you are. masema says you
are. urien could have been your cousin, and if rhian put on a dress and said she was your aunt, youd
believe it yourself. oh, all right. dont look at me like that, perrin. if he wants to say he isnt, all right.
what difference does it make, anyway? perrin shook his head.
ogier girls brought water and towels for washing faces and hands, and cheese and fruit and wine, with
pewter goblets a little too large to be comfortable in the hand. other ogier women came, too, their
dresses all embroidered. one by one they appeared, a dozen of them all told, to ask if the humans were
comfortable, if they needed anything. each turned her attentions to loial just before she left. he gave his
answers respectfully but in as few words as rand had ever heard him use, standing with an ogiersized,
woodbound book clutched to his chest like a shield, and when they went, he huddled in his chair with
the book held up in front of his face. the books in the house were one thing not sized for humans.
just smell this air, lord rand, hurin said, filling his lungs with a smile. his feet dangled from one of the
chairs at the table; he swung them like a boy. i never thought most places smelled bad, but this . . . lord
rand, i dont think theresever been any killing here. not even any hurting, except by accident.
thestedding are supposed to be safe for everyone, rand said. he was watching loial. thats what
the stories say, anyway. he swallowed a last bit of white cheese and went over to the ogier. mat
followed with a goblet in his hand. whats the matter, loial? rand said. youve been as nervous as a
cat in a dogyard ever since we came here.
it is nothing, loial said, giving the door an uneasy glance from. the corner of his eye.
are you afraid theyll find out you left stedding shangtai without permission from your elders?
loial looked around wildly, the tufts on his ears vibrating. dont say that, he hissed. not where
anyone can hear. if they found out . . . with a heavy sigh, he slumped back, looking from rand to mat.
i dont know how humans do it, but among ogier . . . if a girl sees a boy she likes, she goes to her
mother. or sometimes the mother sees someone she thinks is suitable. in any case, if they agree, the girls
mother goes to the boys mother, and the next thing the boy knows, his marriage is all arranged.
doesnt the boy have any say in it? mat asked incredulously.
none. the women always say we would spend our lives married to the trees if it was left to us. loial
shifted, grimacing. half of our marriages take place betweenstedding ; groups of young ogier visit from
stedding tostedding so they can see, and be seen. if they discover im outside without permission, the
elders will almost certainly decide i need a wife to settle me down. before i know it, theyll have sent a
message to stedding shangtai, to my mother, and she will come here and have me married before she
washes off the dust of her journey. shes always said i am too hasty and need a wife. i think she was
looking when i left. whatever wife she chooses for me . . . well, any wife at all wont let me go back
outside until i have gray in my beard. wives always say no man should be allowed outside until hes
settled enough to control his temper.



mat gave a guffaw loud enough to draw every head, but at loials frantic gesture he spoke softly.
among us, men do the choosing, and no wife can stop a man doing what he wants.
rand frowned, remembering how egwene had begun following him around when they were both little. it
was then that mistress alvere had begun taking a special interest in him, more than in any of the other
boys. later, some girls would dance with him on feastdays and some would not, and those who would
were always egwenes friends, while those who would not were girls egwene did not like. he also
seemed to remember mistress alvere taking tam aside and she was muttering about tam not
having a wife for her to talk to!  and after that, tam and everyone else had acted as if he and
egwene were promised, even though they had not knelt before the womens circle to say the words. he
had never thought about it this way before; things between egwene and him had always just seemed to
be the way they were, and that was that.
i think we do it the same way, he muttered, and when mat laughed, he added, do you remember
your father ever doing anything your mother really didnt want him to? mat opened his mouth with a
grin, then frowned thoughtfully and closed it again.
juin came down the steps from outside. if you please, will all of you come with me? the elders would
see you. he did not look at loial, but loial still almost dropped the book.
if the elders try to make you stay, rand said, well say we need you to go with us.
ill bet it isnt about you at all, mat said. ill bet they are just going to say we can use the waygate.
he shook himself, and his voice fell even lower. we really have to do it, dont we. it was not a
question.
stay and get married, or travel the ways. loial grimaced ruefully. life is very unsettling withtaveren
for friends.

chapter 36

among the elders

as juin took them through the ogier town, rand saw that loial was growing more and more anxious.
loials ears were as stiff as his back; his eyes grew bigger every time he saw another ogier looking at
him, especially the women and girls, and a large number of them did seem to take notice of him. he
looked as if he expected his own execution.



the bearded ogier gestured to wide steps leading down into a grassy mound that was bigger by far than
any other; it was a hill, for all practical purposes, almost at the base of one of the great trees.
why dont you wait out here, loial? rand said.
the elders   juin began.
  probably just want to see the rest of us, rand finished for him.
why dont they leave him alone, mat put in.
loial nodded vigorously. yes. yes, i think . . . a number of ogier women were watching him, from
whitehaired grandmothers to daughters eriths age, a knot of them talking among themselves but with all
eyes on him. his ears jerked, but he looked at the broad door to which the stone steps led down, and
nodded again. yes, i will sit out here, and ill read. that is it. i will read. fumbling in his coat pocket,
he produced a book. he settled himself on the mound beside the steps, the book small in his hands, and
fixed his eyes on the pages. i will just sit here and read until you come out. his ears twitched as if he
could feel the womens eyes.
juin shook his head, then shrugged and motioned to the steps again. if you please. the elders are
waiting.
the huge, windowless room inside the mound was scaled for ogier, with a thickbeamed ceiling more
than four spans up; it could have fit in any palace, for size at least. the seven ogier seated on the dais
directly in front of the door made it shrink a little by their size, but rand still felt as if he were in a cavern.
the somber floorstones were smooth, if large and irregular in shape, but the gray walls could have been
the rough side of a cliff. the ceiling beams, roughhewn as they were, looked like great roots.
except for a highbacked chair where verin sat facing the dais, the only furnishings were the heavy,
vinecarved chairs of the elders. the ogier woman in the middle of the dais sat in a chair raised a little
higher than those of the others, three bearded men to her left in long, flaring coats, three women to her
right in dresses like her own, embroidered in vines and flowers from neckline to hem. all had aged faces
and pure white hair, even to the tufts on their ears, and an air of massive dignity.
hurin gaped at them openly, and rand felt like staring himself. not even verin had the appearance of
wisdom that was in the elders huge eyes, nor morgase in her crown their authority, nor moiraine their
calm serenity. ingtar was the first to bow, as formally as rand had ever seen from him, while the others
still stood rooted.
i am alar, the ogier woman on the highest chair said when they had finally taken their places beside
verin, eldest of the elders of stedding tsofu. verin has told us that you have need to use the waygate
here. to recover the horn of valere from darkfriends is a great need, indeed, but we have allowed none
to travel the ways in more than one hundred years. neither us, nor the elders of any otherstedding .
i will find the horn, ingtar said angrily. i must. if you will not permit us to use the waygate . . . he
fell silent as verin looked at him, but the scowl remained on his face.
alar smiled. be not so hasty, shienaran. you humans never take time for thought. only decisions
reached in calm can be sure. her smile faded to seriousness, but her voice kept its own measured calm.
the dangers of the ways are not to be faced with a sword in your hand, not charging aiel or ravening
trollocs. i must tell you that to enter the ways is to risk not only death and madness, but perhaps your



very souls.
we have seenmachin shin , rand said, and mat and perrin agreed. they could not manage to sound
eager to do it again.
i will follow the horn to shayol ghul itself, if need be, ingtar said firmly. hurin only nodded as if
including himself in ingtars words.
bring trayal, alar commanded, and juin, who had remained by the door, bowed and left. it is not
enough, she told verin, to hear what can happen. you must see it, know it in your heart.
there was an uncomfortable silence until juin returned, and it became more uncomfortable still as two
ogier women followed him, guiding a darkbearded ogier of middle years, who shambled between them
as if he did not quite know how his legs worked. his face sagged, without any expression at all, and his
big eyes were vacant and unblinking, not staring, not looking, not even seeming to see. one of the
women gently wiped drool from the corner of his mouth. they took his arms to stop him; his foot went
forward, hesitated, then fell back with a thump. he seemed as content to stand as to walk, or at least as
uncaring.
trayal was one of the last among us to go along the ways, alar said softly. he came out as you see
him. will you touch him, verin?
verin gave her a long look, then rose and strode to trayal. he did not move as she laid her hands on his
wide chest, not even a flicker of an eye to acknowledge her touch. with a sharp hiss, she jerked back,
staring up at him, then whirled to face the elders. he is . . . empty. this body lives, but there is nothing
inside it. nothing. every elder wore a look of unbearable sadness.
nothing, one of the elders to alars right said softly. her eyes seemed to hold all the pain trayals no
longer could. no mind. no soul. nothing of trayal remains but his body.
he was a fine treesinger, one of the men sighed.
alar motioned, and the two women turned trayal to lead him out; they had to move him before he
began to walk.
we know the risks, verin said. but whatever the risks, we must follow the horn of valere.
the eldest nodded. the horn of valere. i do not know whether it is worse news that it is in darkfriend
hands, or that it has been found at all. she looked down the row of elders; each nodded in turn, one of
the men tugging his beard doubtfully first. very well. verin tells me time is urgent. i will show you to the
waygate myself. rand was feeling half relieved and half afraid, when she added, you have with you a
young ogier. loial, son of arent son of halan, from stedding shangtai. he is far from his home.
we need him, rand said quickly. his words slowed under surprised stares from the elders and verin,
but he went on stubbornly. we need him to go with us, and he wants to.
loials a friend, perrin said, at the same time that mat said, he doesnt get in the way, and he carries
his own weight. neither of them appeared comfortable at having the elders focus shift to them, but they
did not back down.
is there some reason he cannot come with us? ingtar asked. as mat says, he has held his own. i



dont know that we need him, but if he wants to come, why  ?
we do need him, verin broke in smoothly. few any longer know the ways, but loial has studied
them. he can decipher the guidings.
alar eyed them each in turn, then settled to a study of rand. she looked as if she knew things; all the
elders did, but she most of all. verin says you aretaveren , she said at last, and i can feel it in you.
that i can do so means that you must be very stronglytaveren indeed, for such talents ever run weakly
in us, if at all. have you drawn loial, son of arent son of halan, intotamaralailen , the web the
pattern weaves around you?
i . . . i just want to find the horn and . . . rand let the rest of it die. alar had not mentioned mats
dagger. he did not know whether verin had told the elders, or held it back for some reason. he is my
friend, eldest.
your friend, alar said. he is young by our way of thinking. you are young, too, buttaveren . you
will look after him, and when the weaving is done, you will see that he comes safely home to stedding
shangtai.
i will, he told her. it had the feeling of a commitment, the swearing of an oath.
then we will go to the waygate.
outside, loial scrambled to his feet when they appeared, alar and verin leading. ingtar sent hurin off at
a run to fetch uno and the other soldiers. loial eyed the eldest warily, then fell in with rand at the rear of
the procession. the ogier women who had been watching him were all gone. did the elders say
anything about me? did she . . .? he peered at alars broad back as she ordered juin to have their
horses brought. she started off with verin while juin was still bowing himself away, bending her head to
talk quietly.
she told rand to take care of you, mat told loial solemnly as they followed, and see you got home
safely as a babe. i dont see why you cant stay here and get married.
she said you could come with us. rand glared at mat, which made mat chortle under his breath. it
sounded odd, coming from that drawn face. loial was twirling the stem of a trueheart blossom between
his fingers. did you go picking flowers? rand asked.
erith gave it to me. loial watched the yellow petals spin. she really is very pretty, even if mat does
not see it.
does that mean you dont want to go with us after all?
loial gave a start. what? oh, no. i mean, yes. i do want to go. she only gave me a flower. just a
flower. he took a book out of his pocket, though, and pressed the blossom under the front cover. as
he returned the book, he murmured to himself, barely loud enough for rand to hear, and she said i was
handsome, too. mat let out a wheeze and doubled over, staggering along clutching his sides, and loials
cheeks colored. well . . . she said it. i didnt.
perrin rapped mat smartly on the top of his head with his knuckles. nobody ever said mat was
handsome. hes just jealous.



thats not true, mat said, straightening abruptly. neysa ayellin thinks im handsome. shes told me
so more than once.
is neysa pretty? loial asked.
she has a face like a goat, perrin said blandly. mat choked, trying to get his protests out.
rand grinned in spite of himself. neysa ayellin was almost as pretty as egwene. and this was almost
like old times, almost like being back home, bantering back and forth, and nothing more important in the
world than a laugh and twitting the other fellow.
as they made their way through the town, ogier greeted the eldest, bowing or curtsying, eyeing the
human visitors with interest. alars set face kept anyone from stopping to speak, though. the only thing
that indicated when they left the town was the absence of the mounds; there were still ogier about,
examining trees, or sometimes working with pitch and saw or axe where there were dead limbs or where
a tree needed more sunlight. they handled the tasks tenderly.
juin joined them, leading their horses, and hurin came riding with uno and the other soldiers, and the
packhorses, just before alar pointed and said, it is over there. the banter died.
rand felt a momentary surprise. the waygate had to be outside thestedding  the ways had been
begun with the one power; they could not have been made inside  but there was nothing to indicate
they had crossed the boundary. then he realized there was a difference; the sense of something lost that
he had felt since entering thestedding was gone. that gave him another sort of chill.saidin was there
again. waiting.
alar led them past a tall oak, and there in a small clearing stood the big slab of the waygate, the front of
it delicately worked in tightly woven vines and leaves from a hundred different plants. around the edge of
the clearing the ogier had built a low stone coping that seemed as if it had grown there, suggesting a
circle of roots. the look of it made rand uncomfortable. it took him a moment to realize that the roots
suggested were those of bramble and briar, burningleaf and itch oak. not the sort of plants into which
anyone would want to stumble.
the eldest stopped short of the coping. the wall is meant to warn away any who comes here. not that
many of us do. i myself will not cross it. but you may. juin did not go as close as she did; he kept
rubbing his hands on the front of his coat, and would not look at the waygate.
thank you, verin told her. the need is great, or i would not have asked it.
rand tensed as the aes sedai stepped over the coping and approached the waygate. loial took a deep
breath and muttered to himself. uno and the rest of the soldiers shifted in their saddles and loosened
swords in their scabbards. there was nothing along the ways against which a sword would be any use,
but it was something to convince themselves they were ready. only ingtar and the aes sedai seemed
calm; even alar gripped her skirt with both hands.
verin plucked theavendesora leaf, and rand leaned forward intently. he knew an urge to assume the
void, to be where he could reachsaidin if he needed to.
the greenery carved across the waygate stirred in an unfelt breeze, leaves fluttering as a gap opened
down the center of the mass and the two halves began to swing open.



rand stared at the first crack. there was no dull, silvery reflection behind it, only blackness blacker than
pitch. close it! he shouted. the black wind! close it!
verin took one startled look and thrust the threepointed leaf back in among all the varied leaves already
there; it stayed when she took her hand away and backed toward the coping. as soon as the
avendesora leaf was back in its place, the waygate immediately began to close. the crack disappeared,
vines and leaves merging, hiding the blackness ofmachin shin , and the waygate was only stone again, if
stone carved in a nearer semblance of life than seemed possible.
alar let out a shuddering breath. machin shin. so close.
it didnt try to come out, rand said. juin made a strangled sound.
i have told you, verin said, the black wind is a creature of the ways. it cannot leave them. she
sounded calm, but she still wiped her hands on her skirt. rand opened his mouth, then gave it up. and
yet, she went on, i wonder at it being here. first in cairhien, now here. i wonder. she gave rand a
sidelong glance that made him jump. the look was so quick that he did not think anyone else noticed it,
but to rand it seemed to connect him with the black wind.
i have never heard of this, alar said slowly, machin shinwaiting when a waygate was opened. it
always roamed the ways. but it has been long, and perhaps the black wind hungers, and hopes to catch
some unwary one entering a gate. verin, assuredly you cannot use this waygate. and however great
your need, i cannot say i am sorry. the ways belong to the shadow, now.
rand frowned at the waygate.could it be following me? there were too many questions. had fain
somehow ordered the black wind? verin said it could not be done. and why would fain demand that
he follow, then try to stop him? he only knew that he believed the message. he had to go to toman
head. if they found the horn of valere and mats dagger under a bush tomorrow, he still had to go.
verin stood with eyes unfocused in thought. mat was sitting on the coping with his head in his hands, and
perrin watched him worriedly. loial seemed relieved that they could not use the waygate, and ashamed
at being relieved.
we are done for here, ingtar announced. verin sedai, i followed you here against my better
judgment, but i can no longer follow. i mean to return to cairhien. barthanes can tell me where the
darkfriends went, and somehow i will make him do it.
fain went to toman head, rand said wearily. and where he went, thats where the horn is, and the
dagger.
i suppose . . .  perrin shrugged reluctantly. i suppose we could try another waygate. at another
stedding ?
loial stroked his chin and spoke quickly, as if to make up for his relief at the failure here. stedding
cantoine lies just above the river iralell, and stedding taijing is east of it in the spine of the world. but
the waygate in caemlyn, where the grove was, is closer, and the gate in the grove at tar valon is closest
of all.
whichever waygate we try to use, verin said absently, i fear we will findmachin shin waiting. alar
looked at her questioningly, but the aes sedai said no more that anyone could hear. she muttered to
herself instead, shaking her head as if arguing with herself.



what we need, hurin said diffidently, is one of those portal stones. he looked to alar, then verin,
and when neither told him to stop, he went on, sounding increasingly confident. the lady selene said
those old aes sedai had studied those worlds, and that was how they knew how to make the ways.
and that place we were . . . well, it only took us two days less to travel a hundred leagues. if we could
use a portal stone to go to that world, or one like it, why, itd take no more than a week or two to reach
the aryth ocean, and we could come back right on toman head. maybe it isnt so quick as the ways,
but its a long sight quicker than riding off west. what do you say, lord ingtar? lord rand?
verin answered him. what you suggest might be possible, sniffer, but as well hope to open this
waygate again and findmachin shin gone as hope to find a portal stone. i know none closer than the
aiel waste. though we could go back into kinslayers dagger, if you, or rand, or loial think you could
find that stone again.
rand looked at mat. his friend had lifted his head hopefully at this talk of the stones. a few weeks,
verin had said. if they simply rode west, mat would never live to see toman head.
i can find it, rand said reluctantly. he felt ashamed.mats going to die, darkfriends have the horn
of valere, fain will hurt emonds field if you dont follow him, and youre afraid to channel the
power. once to go and once to come back. twice more wont drive you mad . what really made
him afraid, though, was the eagerness that leaped inside him at the thought of channeling again, of feeling
the power fill him, of feeling truly alive.
i do not understand this, alar said slowly. the portal stones have not been used since the age of
legends. i did not think there was anyone who still knew how to use them.
the brown ajah knows many things, verin said dryly, and i know how the stones may be used.
the eldest nodded. truly there are wonders in the white tower of which we do not dream. but if you
can use a portal stone, there is no need for you to ride to kinslayers dagger. there is a stone not far
from where we stand.
the wheel weaves as the wheel wills, and the pattern provides what is needful. the absent look
dropped from verins face altogether. take us to it, she said briskly. we have lost more than enough
time already.

chapter 37

what might be



alar led them away from the waygate at a dignified pace, though juin seemed more than anxious to
leave the waygate behind. mat, at least, looked ahead eagerly, and hurin seemed confident, while loial
appeared concerned more that alar might change her mind about his going than about anything else.
rand did not hurry as he pulled red along by the reins. he did not think verin meant to use the stone
herself.
the gray stone column stood upright near a beech almost a hundred feet tall and four paces thick; rand
would have thought it a big tree before he saw the great trees. there was no warning coping here, only
a few wildflowers pushing through the leafy mulch of the forest floor. the portal stone itself was
weathered, but the symbols covering it were still clear enough to make out.
the mounted shienaran soldiers spread out in a loose circle around the stone and those afoot.
we stood it upright, alar said, when we found it many years ago, but we did not move it. it . . .
seemed to . . . resist being moved. she went right up to it, and laid a big hand on the stone. i have
always thought of it as a symbol of what has been lost, what has been forgotten. in the age of legends, it
could be studied and somewhat understood. to us, it is only stone.
more than that, i hope. verins voice grew brisker. eldest, i thank you for your help. forgive us for
our lack of ceremony in leaving you, but the wheel waits for no woman. at least we will no longer
disturb the peace of yourstedding .
we called the stonemasons back from cairhien, alar said, but we still hear what happens in the
world outside. false dragons. the great hunt of the horn. we hear, and it passes us by. i do not think
tarmon gaidon will pass us by, or leave us in peace. fare you well, verin sedai. all of you, fare well,
and may you shelter in the palm of the creators hand. juin. she paused only for a glance at loial and a
last admonitory look at rand, and then the ogier were gone among the trees.
there was a creaking of saddles as the soldiers shifted. ingtar looked around the circle they made. is
this necessary, verin sedai? even if it can be done . . . we do not even know if the darkfriends really
have taken the horn to toman head. i still believe i can make barthanes  
if we cannot be sure, verin said mildly, cutting him off, then toman head is as good a place to look
as any other. more than once ive heard you say you would ride to shayol ghul if need be to recover the
horn. do you hold back now, at this? she gestured to the stone under the smoothbarked tree.
ingtars back stiffened. i hold back at nothing. take us to toman head or take us to shayol ghul. if
the horn of valere lies at the end, i will follow you.
that is well, ingtar. now, rand, you have been transported by a portal stone more recently than i.
come. she motioned to him, and he led red over to her at the stone.
youve used a portal stone? he glanced over his shoulder to make sure no one else was close
enough to hear. then you dont mean for me to. he gave a relieved shrug.
verin looked at him blandly. i have never used a stone; that is why your use is more recent than mine. i
am well aware of my limits. i would be destroyed before i came close to channeling enough power to
work a portal stone. but i know a little of them. enough to help you, a bit.
but i dont knowanything . he led his horse around the stone, looking it up and down. the one



thing i remember is the symbol for our world. selene showed me, but i dont see it here.
of course not. not on a stone in our world; the symbols are aids in getting to a world. she shook her
head. what would i not give to talk with this girl of yours? or better, to put my hands on her book. it is
generally thought that no copy ofmirrors of the wheel survived the breaking whole. serafelle always
tells me there are more books that we believe lost than i could credit waiting to be found. well, no use in
worrying over what i dont know. i do know some things. the symbols on the top half of the stone
stand for worlds. not all the worlds that might be, of course. apparently, not every stone connects to
every world, and the aes sedai of the age of legends believed that there were possible worlds no
stones at all touched. do you see nothing that sparks a memory?
nothing. if he found the right symbol, he could use it to find fain and the horn, to save mat, to stop
fain hurting emonds field. if he found the symbol, he would have to touchsaidin . he wanted to save
mat and stop fain, but the did not want to touchsaidin . he was afraid to channel, and he hungered for it
like a starving man for food. i dont remember anything.
verin sighed. the symbols at the bottom indicate stones at other places. if you know the trick of it, you
could take us, not to this same stone in another world, but to one of those others there, or even to one of
them here. it was something akin to traveling, i think, but just as no one remembers how to travel, no
one remembers the trick. without that knowledge, trying it might easily destroy us all. she pointed to
two parallel wavy lines crossed by an odd squiggle, carved low on the column. that indicates a stone
on toman head. it is one of three stones for which i know the symbol; the only one of those three ive
visited. and what i learned  after nearly being caught by the snows in the mountains of mist and
freezing my way across almoth plain  was absolutely nothing. do you play at dice, or cards, rand
althor?
mats the gambler. why?
yes. well, well leave him out of this, i think. these other symbols are also known to me.
with one finger she outlined a rectangle containing eight carvings that were much alike, a circle and an
arrow, but in half the arrow was contained inside the circle, while in the others the point pierced the circle
through. the arrows pointed left, right, up and down, and surrounding each circle was a different line of
what rand was sure was script, though in no language he knew, all curving lines that suddenly became
jagged hooks, then flowed on again.
at least, verin went on, i know this much about them. each stands for a world, the study of which
led eventually to the making of the ways. these are not all of the worlds studied, but the only ones for
which i know the symbols. this is where gambling comes in. i dont know what any of these worlds is
like. it is believed there are worlds where a year is only a day here, and others where a day is a year
here. there are supposed to be worlds where the very air would kill us at a breath, and worlds that
barely have enough reality to hold together. i would not speculate on what might happen if we found
ourselves in one of those. you must choose. as my father would have said, its time to roll the dice.
rand stared, shaking his head. i could kill all of us, whatever i choose.
are you not willing to take that risk? for the horn of valere? for mat?
why are you so willing to take it? i dont even know if i can do it. it  it doesnt work every time i
try. he knew no one had come any closer, but he looked anyway. all of them waited in a loose circle
around the stone, watching, but not close enough to eavesdrop. sometimessaidin is just there. i can



feel it, but it might as well be on the moon as far as touching it. and even if it does work, what if i take us
someplace we cant breathe? what good will that do mat? or the horn?
you are the dragon reborn, she said quietly. oh, you can die, but i dont think the pattern will let
you die until it is done with you. then again, the shadow lies on the pattern, now, and who can say how
that affects the weaving? all you can do is follow your destiny.
i am rand althor, he growled. i am not the dragon reborn. i wont be a false dragon.
you are what you are. will you choose, or will you stand here until your friend dies?
rand heard his teeth grinding and forced himself to unclench his jaw. the symbols could all have been
exactly alike, for all they meant to him. the script could as well have been a chickens scratchings. at last
he settled on one, with an arrow pointing left because it pointed toward toman head, an arrow that
pierced the circle because it had broken free, as he wanted to. he wanted to laugh. such small things on
which to gamble all their lives.
come closer, verin ordered the others. it will be best if you are near. they obeyed, with only a little
hesitation. it is time to begin, she said as they gathered round.
she threw back her cloak and put her hands on the column, but rand saw her watching him from the
corner of her eye. he was aware of nervous coughing and throatclearing from the men around the
stone, a curse from uno at someone hanging back, a weak joke from mat, a loud gulp from loial. he
took the void.
it was so easy, now. the flame consumed fear and passion and was gone almost before he thought to
form it. gone, leaving only emptiness, and shiningsaidin , sickening, tantalizing, stomachturning,
seductive. he . . . reached for it . . . and it filled him, made him alive. he did not move a muscle, but he
felt as if he were quivering with the rush of the one power into him. the symbol formed itself, an arrow
piercing a circle, floating just beyond the void, as hard as the stuff it was carved on. he let the one
power flow through him to the symbol.
the symbol shimmered, flickered.
something is happening, verin said. something . . .
the world flickered.
the iron lock spun across the farmhouse floor, and rand dropped the hot teakettle as a huge figure with
rams horns on its head loomed in the doorway with the darkness of winternight behind it.
run! tam shouted. his sword flashed, and the trolloc toppled, but it grappled with tam as it fell,
pulling him down.
more crowded in at the door, blackmailed shapes with human faces distorted with muzzles and beaks
and horns, oddly curved swords stabbing at tam as he tried to struggle to his feet, spiked axes swinging,
red blood on steel.
father! rand screamed. clawing his belt knife from its sheath, he threw himself over the table to help
his father, and screamed again as the first sword ran through his chest.



blood bubbled up into his mouth, and a voice whispered inside his head,i have won again, lews
therin.
flicker.
rand struggled to hold the symbol, dimly aware of verins voice. . . . is not . . .
the power flooded.
flicker.
rand was happy after he married egwene, and tried to not let the moods take him, the times when he
thought there should have been something more, something different. news of the world outside came
into the two rivers with peddlers, and merchants come to buy wool and tabac, always news of fresh
troubles, of wars and false dragons everywhere. there was a year when neither merchants nor peddlers
came, and when they returned the next they brought word that artur hawkwings armies had come
back, or their descendants, at least. the old nations were broken, it was said, and the worlds new
masters, who used chained aes sedai in their battles, had torn down the white tower and salted the
ground where tar valon had stood. there were no more aes sedai.
it all made little difference in the two rivers. crops still had to be planted, sheep sheared, lambs
tended. tam had grandsons and granddaughters to dandle on his knee before he was laid to rest beside
his wife, and the old farmhouse grew new rooms. egwene became wisdom, and most thought she was
even better than the old wisdom, nynaeve almaera, had been. it was as well she was, for her cures
that worked so miraculously on others were only just able to keep rand alive from the sickness that
constantly seemed to threaten him. his moods grew worse, blacker, and he raged that this was not what
was meant to be. egwene grew frightened when the moods were on him, for strange things sometimes
happened when he was at his bleakest  lightning storms she had not heard listening to the wind,
wildfires in the forest  but she loved him and cared for him and kept him sane, though some muttered
that rand althor was crazy and dangerous.
when she died, he sat alone for long hours by her grave, tears soaking his grayflecked beard. his
sickness came back, and he wasted; he lost the last two fingers on his right hand and one on his left, his
ears looked like scars, and men muttered that he smelled of decay. his blackness deepened.
yet when the dire news came, none refused to accept him at their side. trollocs and fades and things
undreamed of had burst out of the blight, and the worlds new masters were being thrown back, for all
the powers they wielded. so rand took up the bow he had just fingers enough left to shoot and limped
with those who marched north to the river taren, men from every village, farm, and corner of the two
rivers, with their bows, and axes, and boarspears, and swords that had lain rusting in attics. rand wore
a sword, too, with a heron on the blade, that he had found after tam died, though he knew nothing of
how to use it. women came, too, shouldering what weapons they could find, marching alongside the
men. some laughed, saying that they had the strange feeling they had done this before.
and at the taren the people of the two rivers met the invaders, endless ranks of trollocs led by
nightmare fades beneath a dead black banner that seemed to eat the light. rand saw that banner and
thought the madness had taken him again, for it seemed that this was what he had been born for, to fight
that banner. he sent every arrow at it, straight as his skill and the void would serve, never worrying about
the trollocs forcing their way across the river, or the men and women dying to either side of him. it was
one of those trollocs that ran him through, before it loped howling for blood deeper into the two rivers.
and as he lay on the bank of the taren, watching the sky seem to grow dark at noon, breath coming



ever slower, he heard a voice say,i have won again, lews therin.
flicker.
the arrowandcircle contorted into parallel wavy lines, and he fought it back again.
verins voice.  . . . right. something . . .
the power raged.
flicker.
tam tried to console rand when egwene took sick and died just a week before their wedding. nynaeve
tried, too, but she was shaken herself, since for all her skill she had no idea what it was that had killed the
girl. rand had sat outside egwenes house while she died, and there seemed to be nowhere in emonds
field he could go that he did not still hear her screaming. he knew he could not stay. tam gave him a
sword with a heronmark blade, and though he explained little of how a shepherd in the two rivers had
come by such a thing, he taught rand how to use it. on the day rand left, tam gave him a letter he said
might get rand taken into the army of illian, and hugged him, and said, ive never had another son, or
wanted another. come back with a wife like i did, if you can, boy, but come back in any case.
rand had his money stolen in baerlon, though, and his letter of introduction, and almost his sword, and
he met a woman called min who told him such crazy things about himself that he finally left the city to get
away from her. eventually his wanderings brought him to caemlyn, and there his skill with the sword
earned him a place in the queens guards. sometimes he found himself looking at the daughterheir,
elayne, and at such times he was filled with odd thoughts that this was not the way things were supposed
to be, that there should be something more to his life. elayne did not look at him, of course; she married a
tairen prince, though she did not seem happy in it. rand was just a soldier, once a shepherd from a small
village so far toward the western border that only lines on a map any longer truly connected it to andor.
besides, he had a dark reputation, as a man of violent moods.
some said he was mad, and in ordinary times perhaps not even his skill with the sword would have kept
him in the guard, but these were not ordinary times. false dragons sprang up like weeds. every time one
was taken down, two more proclaimed themselves, or three, till every nation was torn by war. and
rands star rose, for he had learned the secret of his madness, a secret he knew he had to keep and did.
he could channel. there were always places, times, in a battle when a little channeling, not big enough to
be noticed in the confusion, could make luck. sometimes it worked, this channeling, and sometimes not,
but it worked often enough. he knew he was mad, and did not care. a wasting sickness came on him,
and he did not care about that, either, and neither did anyone else, for word had come that artur
hawkwings armies had returned to reclaim the land.
rand led a thousand men when the queens guards crossed the mountains of mist  he never thought
of turning aside to visit the two rivers; he seldom thought of the two rivers at all, anymore  and he
commanded the guard when the shattered remnants retreated back across the mountains. the length of
andor he fought and fell back, amid hordes of fleeing refugees, until at last he came to caemlyn. many of
the people of caemlyn had fled already, and many counseled the army to retreat further, but elayne was
queen, now, and vowed she would not leave caemlyn. she would not look at his ruined face, scarred
by his sickness, but he could not leave her, and so what was left of the queens guards prepared to
defend the queen while her people ran.
the power came to him during the battle for caemlyn, and he hurled lightning and fire among the



invaders, and split the earth under their feet, yet the feeling came again, too, that he had been born for
something else. for all he did, there were too many of the enemy to stop, and they also had those who
could channel. at last, a lightning bolt hurled rand from the palace wall, broken, bleeding, and burned,
and as his last breath rattled in his throat, he heard a voice whisper,i have won again, lews therin.
flicker.
rand struggled to hold the void as it quivered under the hammer blows of the world flickering, to hold
the one symbol as a thousand of them darted along the surface of the void. he struggled to hold on to
any one symbol.
. . . is wrong! verin screamed.
the power was everything.
flicker. flicker. flicker. flicker. flicker. flicker.
he was a soldier. he was a shepherd. he was a beggar, and a king. he was farmer, gleeman, sailor,
carpenter. he was born, lived, and died an aiel. he died mad, he died rotting, he died of sickness,
accident, age. he was executed, and multitudes cheered his death. he proclaimed himself the dragon
reborn and flung his banner across the sky; he ran from the power and hid; he lived and died never
knowing. he held off the madness and the sickness for years; he succumbed between two winters.
sometimes moiraine came and took him away from the two rivers, alone or with those of his friends
who had survived winternight; sometimes she did not. sometimes other aes sedai came for him.
sometimes the red ajah. egwene married him; egwene, sternfaced in the stole of the amyrlin seat, led
the aes sedai who gentled him; egwene, with tears in her eyes, plunged a dagger into his heart, and he
thanked her as he died. he loved other women, married other women. elayne, and min, and a
fairhaired farmers daughter met on the road to caemlyn, and women he had never seen before he lived
those lives. a hundred lives. more. so many he could not count them. and at the end of every life, as he
lay dying, as he drew his final breath, a voice whispered in his ear.i have won again, lews therin.
flicker flicker flicker flicker flicker flicker flicker flicker flicker flicker flicker flicker flicker
flicker flicker flicker flicker flicker flicker flicker flicker flicker flicker flicker flicker flicker.
the void vanished, contact withsaidin fled, and rand fell with a thud that would have knocked the
breath out of him if he had not already been half numb. he felt rough stone under his cheek, and his
hands. it was cold.
he was aware of verin, struggling from her back to hands and knees. he heard someone vomit roughly,
and raised his head. uno was kneeling on the ground, scrubbing the back of his hand across his mouth.
everyone was down, and the horses stood stifflegged and quivering, eyes wild and rolling. ingtar had his
sword out, gripping the hilt so hard the blade shook, staring at nothing. loial sat sprawled, wideeyed
and stunned. mat was huddled in a ball with his arms wrapped around his head, and perrin had his
fingers dug into his face as if he wanted to rip away whatever he had seen, or perhaps rip out the eyes
that had seen it. none of the soldiers were any better. masema wept openly, tears streaming down his
face, and hurin was looking around as if for a place to run.
what . . . ? rand stopped to swallow. he was lying on rough, weathered stone half buried in the dirt.
what happened?
a surge of the one power. the aes sedai tottered to her feet and pulled her cloak tight with a shiver.



it was as if we were being forced . . . pushed . . . it seemed to come out of nowhere. you must learn to
control it. you must! that much of the power could burn you to a cinder.
verin, i . . . i lived . . . i was . . . he realized the stone under him was rounded. the portal stone.
hastily, shakily, he pushed himself to his feet. verin, i lived and died, i dont know how many times.
every time it was different, but it was me. it was me.
the lines that join the worlds that might be, laid by those who knew the numbers of chaos. verin
shuddered; she seemed to be talking to herself. ive never heard it, but there is no reason we would not
be born in those worlds, yet the lives we lived would be different lives. of course. different lives for the
different ways things might have happened.
is that what happened? i . . . we . . . saw how our lives could have been?i have won again, lews
therin. no! i am rand althor!
verin gave herself a shake and looked at him. does it surprise you that your life might go differently if
you made different choices, or different things happened to you? though i never thought i  well. the
important thing is, we are here. though not as we hoped.
where is here? he demanded. the woods of stedding tsofu were gone, replaced by rolling land.
there seemed to be forest not far to the west, and a few hills. it had been high in the day when they
gathered around the stone in thestedding but here the sun stood low toward afternoon in a gray sky. the
handful of trees nearby were bare branched, or else held a few leaves bright with color. a cold wind
gusted from the east, sending leaves scurrying across the ground.
toman head, verin said. this is the stone i visited. you should not have tried to bring us directly
here. i dont know what went wrong  i dont suppose i ever will  but from the trees, i would say it
is well into late autumn. rand, we havent gained any time by it. weve lost time. i would say we have
easily spent four months in coming here.
but i didnt  
you must let me guide you in these things. i cannot teach you, its true, but perhaps i can at least keep
you from killing yourself  and the rest of us  by overreaching. even if you do not kill yourself, if the
dragon reborn burns himself out like a guttering candle, who will face the dark one then? she did not
wait for him to renew his protests, but went to ingtar instead.
the shienaran gave a start when she touched his arm, and looked at her with frantic eyes. i walk in the
light, he said hoarsely. i will find the horn of valere and pull down shayol ghuls power.i will! 
of course you will, she said soothingly. she took his face in her hands, and he drew a sudden breath,
abruptly recovering from whatever had held him. except that memory still lay in his eyes. there, she
said. that will do for you. i will see how i can help the rest. we may still recover the horn, but our path
has not grown smoother.
as she started around among the others, stopping briefly by each, rand went to his friends. when he
tried to straighten mat, mat jerked and stared at him, then grabbed rands coat with both hands. rand,
id never tell anyone about  about you. i wouldnt betray you. you have to believe that! he looked
worse than ever, but rand thought it was mostly fright.
i do, rand said. he wondered what lives mat had lived, and what he had done.he must have told



someone, or he wouldnt be so anxious about it . he could not hold it against him. those had been
other mats, not this one. besides, after some of the alternatives he had seen for himself . . . i believe
you. perrin?
the curlyhaired youth dropped his hands from his face with a sigh. red marks scored his forehead and
cheeks where his nails had dug in. his yellow eyes hid his thoughts. we dont have many choices really,
do we, rand? whatever happens, whatever we do, some things are almost always the same. he let out
another long breath. where are we? is this one of those worlds you and hurin were talking about?
its toman head, rand told him. in our world. or so verin says. and it is autumn.
mat looked worried. how could  ? no, i dont want to know how it happened. but how are we
going to find fain and the dagger now? he could be anywhere by this time.
hes here, rand assured him. he hoped he was right. fain had had time to take ship for anyplace he
wanted to go. time to ride to emonds field. or tar valon.please, light, he didnt get tired of
waiting. if hes hurt egwene, or anybody in emonds field, ill . . .light burn me, i tried to come
in time.
the larger towns on toman head are all west of here, verin announced loudly enough for all to hear.
everyone was on their feet again, except for rand and his two friends; she came and put her hands on
mat as she spoke. not that there are many villages large enough to call towns. if we are to find any
trace of the darkfriends, to the west is the place to begin. and i think we should not waste the daylight
sitting here.
when mat blinked and stood up  he still looked ill, but he moved spryly  she put her hands on
perrin. rand backed away when she reached for him.
dont be foolish, she told him.
i dont want your help, he said quietly. or any aes sedai help.
her lips twitched. as you wish.
they mounted immediately and rode west, leaving the portal stone behind. no one protested, rand
least of all.light, let me not be too late.

chapter 38

practice



sitting crosslegged on her bed in her white dress, egwene made three tiny balls of light weave patterns
above her hands. she was not supposed to do this without at least one the accepted to supervise, but
nynaeve, glaring and striding up and down in front of the small fireplace, did after all wear the serpent
ring given to the accepted, and her white dress had the colored rings encircling the hem, even if she was
not allowed to try to teach anyone yet. and egwene had found over these last thirteen weeks that she
could not resist. she knew how easy it was to touchsaidar now. she could always feel it there, waiting
for her, like the smell of perfume or the feel of silk, drawing her, drawing her. and once she did touch it,
she could rarely stop from channeling, or at least trying to. she failed almost as often as she succeeded,
but that was only another spur to keep on.
it often frightened her. how much she wanted to channel frightened her, and how drab and dreary she
felt when she was not channeling, compared to when she was. she wanted to drink it all in, despite the
cautions about burning herself out, and that wanting frightened her most of all. sometimes she wished she
had never come to tar valon. but the fright could not make her stop for long, any more than the fear of
being caught by an aes sedai or by any of the accepted beside nynaeve.
it was safe enough here, though, in her own room. min was there, sitting on the threelegged stool
watching her, but she knew min well enough now to know min would never report her. she thought she
was lucky to have made two good friends since coming to tar valon.
it was a little, windowless room, as all novices rooms were. three short paces took nynaeve from wall
to whiteplastered wall; nynaeves own room was much larger, but since she had made no friends
among the other accepted, she came to egwenes room when she needed someone to talk to, even as
now when she did not talk at all. the tiny fire on the narrow hearth handily kept the first chill of
approaching autumn at bay, though egwene was sure it would not serve so well when winter came. a
small table for study completed the furnishings, and her belongings hung neatly on a row of pegs on the
wall or sat on the short shelf above the table. novices were usually kept too busy to spend time in their
rooms, but today was a freeday, only the third since she and nynaeve had come to the white tower.
else was making calfs eyes at galad today while he was working with the warders, min said, rocking
the stool on two legs.
the small balls faltered for an instant above egwenes hands. she can look at whoever she wants,
egwene said casually. i cant imagine why i would be interested.
no reason, i suppose. he is awfully handsome, if you dont mind him being so rigid. very nice to look
at, especially with his shirt off.
the balls spun furiously. i certainly have no desire to look at galad, with or without his shirt.
i shouldnt tease you, min said contritely. im sorry for that. but you do like to look at him  dont
grimace at me like that  and so does nearly every woman in the white tower who isnt a red. ive
seen aes sedai down at the practice yards when hes working forms, especially greens. checking on
their warders, they say, but i dont see so many when galad isnt there. even the cooks and maids
come out to watch him.
the balls stopped dead, and for a moment egwene stared at them. they vanished. suddenly she
giggled. he it goodlooking, isnt he? even when he walks he looks as if hes dancing. the color in her
cheeks deepened. i know i shouldnt stare at him, but i cant help myself.



i cant either, min said, and i can see what he is like.
but if he is good  ?
egwene, galad is so good hed make you tear your hair out. hed hurt a person because he had to
serve a greater good. he wouldnt even notice who was hurt, because hed be so intent on the other, but
if he did, he would expect them to understand and think it was all well and right.
i suppose you know, egwene said. she had seen mins ability to look at people and read all sorts of
things about them; min did not tell everything she saw, and she did not always see anything, but there had
been enough for egwene to believe. she glanced at nynaeve  the other woman was still pacing,
muttering to herself  then reached forsaidar again and resumed her juggling in a desultory fashion.
min shrugged. i guess i might as well tell you. he didnt even notice what else was doing. he asked
her if she knew whether you might be walking the south garden after supper, since today is a freeday. i
felt sorry for her.
poor else, egwene murmured, and the balls of light became more lively above her hands. min
laughed.
the door banged open, caught by the wind. egwene gave a yelp and let the balls vanish before she saw
it was only elayne.
the goldenhaired daughterheir of andor pushed the door shut and hung up her cloak on a peg. i just
heard, she said. the rumors are true. king galldrian is dead. that makes it a war of succession.
min snorted. civil war. war of succession. a lot of silly names for the same thing. do you mind if we
dont talk about it? thats all we hear. war in cairhien. war on toman head. they may have caught the
false dragon in saldaea, but theres still war in tear. most of it is rumors, anyway. yesterday, i heard
one of the cooks saying shed heard artur hawkwing was marching on tanchico. artur hawkwing!
i thought you did not want to talk about it, egwene said.
i saw logain, elayne said. he was sitting on a bench in the inner court, crying. he ran when he saw
me. i cannot help feeling sorry for him.
better he cries than the rest of us, elayne, min said.
i know what he is, elayne said calmly. or rather, what he was. he isnt anymore, and i can feel sorry
for him.
egwene slumped back against the wall.rand . logain always made her think of rand. she had not
dreamed about him in months, now, not the kind of dreams she had had on theriver queen . anaiya still
made her write down everything she dreamed, and the aes sedai checked them for signs, or connections
to events, but there was never anything about rand except dreams that, anaiya said, meant she missed
him. oddly, she felt almost as if he were not there any longer, as if he had ceased to exist, along with her
dreams, a few weeks after reaching the white tower.and i sit thinking about how nicely galad
walks , she thought bitterly.rand has to be all right. if hed been caught and gentled, id have heard
something.



that sent a chill through her, as it never failed to do, the thought of rand being gentled, rand weeping
and wanting to die as logain did.
elayne sat down beside her on the bed, tucking her feet up under her. if you are mooning over galad,
egwene, you will have no sympathy from me. ill have nynaeve dose you with one of those horrible
concoctions shes always talking about. she frowned at nynaeve, who had taken no notice of her
entrance. what is the matter with her? dont tell me she has started sighing after galad, too!
i wouldnt bother her. min leaned toward the two of them and lowered her voice. that skinny
accepted irella told her she was as clumsy as a cow and had half the talents, and nynaeve clouted her
ear. elayne winced. exactly, min murmured. they had her up to sheriams study before you could
blink, and she hasnt been fit to live with since.
apparently min had not dropped her voice enough, for there was a growl from nynaeve. suddenly the
door whipped open once more, and a gale howled into the room. it did not ruffle the blankets on
egwenes bed, but min and the stool toppled, to roll against the wall. immediately the wind died, and
nynaeve stood with a stricken look on her face.
egwene hurried to the door and peeked out. the noonday sun was burning off the last reminders of last
nights rainstorm. the stilldamp balcony around the novices court was empty, the long row of doors
to novices rooms all shut. the novices who had taken advantage of the freeday to enjoy themselves in
the gardens were no doubt catching up on their sleep. no one could have seen. she closed the door and
took her place beside elayne again as nynaeve helped min to her feet.
im sorry, min, nynaeve said in a tight voice. sometimes my temper . . . i cant ask you to forgive
me, not for this. she took a deep breath. if you want to report me to sheriam, i will understand. i
deserve it.
egwene wished she had not heard that admission; nynaeve could grow prickly over such things.
searching for something on which to focus, something nynaeve could believe she had had her attention
on, she found herself touchingsaidar once more, and began juggling the balls of light again. elayne
quickly joined her; egwene saw the glow form around the daughterheir even before three tiny balls
appeared above her hands. they began to pass the little glowing spheres back and forth in increasingly
intricate patterns. sometimes one winked out as one girl or the other failed to maintain it as it came to
her, then winked back a little altered in color or size.
the one power filled egwene with life. she smelled the faint rose aroma of soap from elaynes morning
bath. she could feel the rough plaster of the walls, the smooth stones of the floor, as well as she could the
bed where she sat. she could hear min and nynaeve breathe, much less their quiet words.
if it comes to forgiving, min said, maybe you should forgive me. you have a temper, and i have a big
mouth. i will forgive you if you forgive me. with murmurs of forgiven that sounded meant on both
sides, the two women hugged. but if you do it again, min said with a laugh, i might cloutyour ear.
next time, nynaeve replied, i will throw something at you. she was laughing, too, but her laughter
ceased abruptly as her eye fell on egwene and elayne. you two stop that, or therewill be someone
going to the mistress of novices. two someones.
nynaeve, you wouldnt! egwene protested. when she saw the look in nynaeves eyes, though, she
hastily severed all contact withsaidar . very well. i believe you. theres no need to prove it.



we have to practice, elayne said. they ask more and more of us. if we did not practice on our own,
we would never keep up. her face showed calm composure, but she had let go ofsaidar as hastily as
egwene herself had.
and what happens when you draw too much, nynaeve asked, and theres no one there to stop you?
i wish you were more afraid. i am. dont you think i know what it is like for you? its always there, and
you want to fill yourself with it. sometimes it is all i can do to make myself stop; i want all of it. i know it
would burn me to a crisp, and i want it anyway. she shivered. i just wish you were more afraid.
i am afraid, egwene said with a sigh. im terrified. but it doesnt seem to help. what about you,
elayne?
the only thing that terrifies me, elayne said airily, is washing dishes. it seems as if i have to wash
dishes every day. egwene threw her pillow at her. elayne pulled it off her head and threw it back, but
then her shoulders slumped. oh, very well. i am so scared i dont know why my teeth are not
chattering. elaida told me id be so frightened that i would want to run away with the traveling people,
but i did not understand. a man who drove oxen as hard as they drive us would be shunned. i am tired
all the time. i wake up tired and go to bed exhausted, and sometimes im so afraid that i will slip and
channel more of the power than i can handle that i . . . peering into her lap, she let the words trail off.
egwene knew what she had not spoken. their rooms lay right next to each other, and as in many of the
novice rooms, a small hole had long ago been bored through the wall between, too small to be seen
unless you knew where to look, but useful for talk after the lamps were extinguished, when the girls could
not leave their rooms. egwene had heard elayne crying herself to sleep more than once, and she had no
doubt that elayne had heard her own crying.
the traveling people are tempting, nynaeve agreed, but wherever you go, it will not change what
you can do. you cannot run fromsaidar . she did not sound as if she liked what she was saying.
what do you see, min? elayne said. are we all going to be powerful aes sedai, or will we spend the
rest of our lives washing dishes as novices, or . . . she shrugged uncomfortably as if she did not want to
voice the third alternative that came to mind. sent home. put out of the tower. two novices had been
put out since egwene came, and everyone spoke of them in whispers, as if they were dead.
min shifted on her stool. i dont like reading friends, she muttered. friendship gets in the way of the
reading. it makes me try to put the best face on what i see. thats why i dont do it for you three
anymore. anyway, nothing has changed about you that i can . . . she squinted at them, and suddenly
frowned. thats new, she breathed.
what? nynaeve asked sharply.
min hesitated before answering. danger. you are all in some kind of danger. or you will be, very soon.
i cant make it out, but it is danger.
you see, nynaeve said to the two girls sitting on the bed. you must take care. we all must. you
must both promise not to channel again without someone to guide you.
i dont want to talk about it anymore, egwene said.
elayne nodded eagerly. yes. lets talk about something else. min, if you put on a dress, ill wager
gawyn would ask you to go walking with him. you know hes been looking at you, but i think the



breeches and the mans coat put him off.
i dress the way i like, and i wont change for a lord, even if he is your brother. min spoke absently,
still squinting at them and frowning; it was a conversation they had had before. sometimes it is useful to
pass as a boy.
no one who looks twice believes you are a boy. elayne smiled.
egwene was uncomfortable. elayne was forcing a semblance of gaiety, min was hardly paying attention,
and nynaeve looked as if she wanted to warn them again.
when the door swung open once more, egwene bounded to her feet to close it, grateful for something
to do besides watch the others pretend. before she reached it, though, a darkeyed aes sedai with her
blond hair done in a multitude of braids stepped into the room. egwene blinked in surprise, as much at it
being any aes sedai as at liandrin. she had not heard that liandrin had returned to the white tower,
but beyond that, novices were sent for if an aes sedai wanted them; it could mean no good, a sister
coming herself.
the room was crowded with five women in it. liandrin paused to adjust her redfringed shawl, eyeing
them. min did not move, but elayne rose, and the three standing curtsied, though nynaeve barely flexed
her knee. egwene did not think nynaeve would ever grow used to having others in authority over her.
liandrins eyes settled on nynaeve. and why are you here, in the novices quarters, child? her tone
was ice.
i am visiting with friends, nynaeve said in a tight voice. after a moment she added a belated, liandrin
sedai.
the accepted, they can have no friends among the novices. this you should have learned by this time,
child. but it is as well that i find you here. you and you  her finger stabbed at elayne and min  will
go.
i will return later. min rose casually, making a great show of being in no hurry to obey, and strolled by
liandrin with a grin, of which liandrin took no notice at all. elayne gave egwene and nynaeve a worried
look before she dropped a curtsy and left.
after elayne closed the door behind her, liandrin stood studying egwene and nynaeve. egwene began
to fidget under the scrutiny, but nynaeve held herself straight, with only a little heightening of her color.
you two are from the same village as the boys who traveled with moiraine. is it not so? liandrin said
suddenly.
do you have some word of rand? egwene asked eagerly. liandrin arched an eyebrow at her.
forgive me, aes sedai. i forget myself.
have you word of them? nynaeve said, just short of a demand. the accepted had no rule about not
speaking to an aes sedai until spoken to.
you have concern for them. that is good. they are in danger, and you might be able to help them.
how do you know theyre in trouble? there was no doubt about the demand in nynaeves voice this



time.
liandrins rosebud mouth tightened, but her tone did not change. though you are not aware of it,
moiraine has sent letters to the white tower concerning you. moiraine sedai, she worries about you,
and about your young . . . friends. these boys, they are in danger. do you wish to help them, or leave
them to their fate?
yes, egwene said, at the same time that nynaeve said; what kind of trouble? why doyou care about
helping them? nynaeve glanced at the red fringe on liandrins shawl. and i thought you didnt like
moiraine.
do not presume too much, child, liandrin said sharply. to be accepted is not to be a sister.
accepted and novices alike listen when a sister speaks, and do as they are told. she drew a breath and
went on; her tone was coldly serene again, but angry white spots marred her cheeks. someday, i am
sure, you will serve a cause, and you will learn then that to serve it you must work even with those whom
you dislike. i tell you i have worked with many with whom i would not share a room if it were left to me
alone. would you not work alongside the one you hated worst, if it would save your friends?
nynaeve nodded reluctantly. but you still havent told us what kind of danger theyre in. liandrin
sedai.
the danger comes from shayol ghul. they are hunted, as i understand they once before were. if you
will come with me, some dangers, at least, may be eliminated. do not ask how, for i cannot tell you, but i
tell you flatly it is so.
we will come, liandrin sedai, egwene said.
come where? nynaeve said. egwene shot her an exasperated look.
toman head.
egwenes mouth fell open, and nynaeve muttered, theres a war on toman head. does this danger
have something to do with artur hawkwings armies?
you believe rumors, child? but even if they were true, is that enough to stop you? i thought you called
these men friends. a twist to liandrins words said she would never do the same.
we will come, egwene said. nynaeve opened her mouth again, but egwene went right on. we will
go, nynaeve. if rand needs our help  and mat, and perrin  we have to give it.
i know that, nynaeve said, but what i want to know is, why us? what can we do that moiraine 
or you, liandrin  cannot?
the white grew in liandrins cheeks  egwene realized nynaeve had forgotten the honorific in
addressing her  but what she said was, you two come from their village. in some way i do not
entirely understand, you are connected to them. beyond that, i cannot say. and no more of your foolish
questions will i answer. will you come with me for their sake? she paused for their assent; a visible
tension left her when they nodded. good. you will meet me at the northernmost edge of the ogier grove
one hour before sunset with your horses and whatever you will need for the journey. tell no one of this.
we are not supposed to leave the tower grounds without permission, nynaeve said slowly.



you have my permission. tell no one. no one at all. the black ajah walks the halls of the white
tower.
egwene gasped, and heard an echoed gasp from nynaeve, but nynaeve recovered quickly. i thought
all aes sedai denied the existence of  of that.
liandrins mouth tightened into a sneer. many do, but tarmon gaidon approaches, and the time
leaves when denials can be made. the black ajah, it is the opposite of everything for which the tower
stands, but it exists, child. it is everywhere, any woman could belong to it, and it serves the dark one. if
your friends are pursued by the shadow, do you think the black ajah will leave you alive and free to
help them? tell no one  no one!  or you may not live to reach toman head. one hour before
sunset. do not fail me. with that, she was gone, the door closing firmly behind her.
egwene collapsed onto her bed with her hands on her knees. nynaeve, shes red ajah. she cant
know about rand. if she did. . .
she cannot know, nynaeve agreed. i wish i knew why a red wanted to help. or why shes willing
to work with moiraine. id have sworn neither of them would give the other water if she were dying of
thirst.
you think shes lying?
she is aes sedai, nynaeve said dryly. ill wager my best silver pin against a blueberry that every
word she said was true. but i wonder if we heard what we thought we did.
the black ajah. egwene shivered. there was no mistaking what she said about that, the light help
us.
no mistaking, nynaeve said. and shes forestalled us asking anyone for advice, because after that,
who can we trust? the light help us indeed.
min and elayne came bustling in, slamming the door behind them. are you really going? min asked,
and elayne gestured toward the tiny hole in the wall above egwenes bed, saying, we listened from my
room. we heard everything.
egwene exchanged glances with nynaeve, wondering how much they had overheard, and saw the same
concern on nynaeves face.if they manage to cipher out about rand . . .
you have to keep this to yourselves, nynaeve cautioned them. i suppose liandrin has arranged
permission from sheriam for us to go, but even if she hasnt, even if they start searching the tower from
top to bottom for us tomorrow, you mustnt say a word.
keep it to myself? min said. no fear on that. im going with you. all i do all day is try to explain to
one brown sister or another something i dont understand myself. i cant even go for a walk without the
amyrlin herself popping out and asking me to read whoever we see. when that woman asks you to do
something, there doesnt seem to be any way out of it. i must have read half the white tower for her, but
she always wants another demonstration. all i needed was an excuse to leave, and this is it. her face
wore a look of determination that allowed no argument.
egwene wondered why min was so determined to go with them rather than simply leaving on her own,



but before she had time to do more than wonder, elayne said, i am going, too.
elayne, nynaeve said gently, egwene and i are the boys kith from emonds field. you are the
daughterheir of andor. if you disappear from the white tower, why, it  it could start a war.
mother wouldnt start a war with tar valon if they dried and salted me, which they may be trying to
do. if you three can go off and have an adventure, you neednt think i am going to stay here and wash
dishes, and scrub floors, and have some accepted berating me because i didnt make the fire the exact
shade of blue she wanted. gawyn will die from envy when he finds out. elayne grinned and reached
over to tug playfully at egwenes hair. besides, if you leave rand lying about loose, i might have a
chance to pick him up.
i dont think either of us is going to have him, egwene said sadly.
then well find whoever he does choose and make her life miserable. but he couldnt be fool enough to
choose someone else when he could have one of us. oh, please smile, egwene. i know hes yours. i just
feel  she hesitated, searching for the word  free. ive never had an adventure. ill bet we wont
either of us cry ourselves to sleep on an adventure. and if we do, we will make sure the gleemen leave
that part out.
this is foolishness, nynaeve said. we are going to toman head. youve heard the news, and the
rumors. it will be dangerous. you must stay here.
i heard what liandrin sedai said about the  the black ajah, too. elaynes voice dropped almost to
a whisper at that name. how safe will i be here, if they are here? if mother even suspected the black
ajah really existed, she would pitch me into the middle of a battle to get me away from them.
but, elayne 
there is only one way for you to stop me coming. that is to tell the mistress of novices. we will make
a pretty picture, all three of us lined up in her study. all four of us. i dont think min would escape from
something like this. so since you are not going to tell sheriam sedai, i am coming, too.
nynaeve threw up her hands. perhaps you can say something to convince her, she told min.
min had been leaning against the door, squinting at elayne, and now she shook her head. i think she
has to come as much as the rest of you. the rest of us. i can see the danger around all of you more
clearly, now. not clearly enough to make it out, but i think it has something to do with you deciding to
go. thats why it is clearer; because it is more certain.
thats no reason for her to come, nynaeve said, but min shook her head again.
she is linked to  to those boys as much as you, or egwene, or me. shes part of it, nynaeve,
whatever it is. part of the pattern, i suppose an aes sedai would say.
elayne seemed taken aback, and interested, too. i am? what part, min?
i cant see it clearly. min looked at the floor. sometimes i wish i couldnt read people at all. most
people arent satisfied with what i see anyway.
if we are all going, nynaeve said, then we had best be about making plans. however much she



might argue beforehand, once a course of action had been decided, nynaeve always went right to the
practicalities: what they had to take with them, and how cold it would be by the time they reached toman
head, and how they could get their horses from the stables without being stopped.
listening to her, egwene could not help wondering what the danger was that min saw for them, and
what danger threatened rand. she knew of only one danger that could threaten him, and it made her
cold to think of it.hold on, rand. hold on, you woolheaded idiot. ill help you somehow.

chapter 39

flight from the white tower

egwene and elayne inclined their heads briefly to each group of women they passed as they made their
way through the tower. it was a good thing, there were so many women from outside in the tower
today, egwene thought, too many for each to have an aes sedai or an accepted for escort. alone or in
small groups, garbed richly or poorly, in dress from half a dozen different lands, some still dusty from
their journey to tar valon, they kept to themselves and waited their turn to ask their questions of the aes
sedai, or present their petitions. some women  ladies or merchants or merchants wives  had
female servants with them. even a few men had come with petitions, standing by themselves, looking
unsure about being in the white tower, and eyeing everyone else uneasily.
in the lead, nynaeve kept her eyes purposefully ahead, her cloak swirling behind her, walking as if she
knew where they were going  which she did, as long as no one stopped them  and had a perfect
right to go there  which was a different matter altogether, of course. dressed now in the clothes they
had brought to tar valon, they certainly did not look like residents of the tower. each had chosen her
best dress that had a skirt divided for riding, and cloaks of fine wool rich with embroidery. as long as
they kept away from all who might recognize them  they had already dodged several who knew their
faces  egwene thought they might make it.
this would do better for a turn in some lords park than a ride to toman head, nynaeve had said
dryly as egwene helped her with the buttons of a gray silk with threadofgold work and pearled flowers
across the bosom and down the sleeves, but it may allow us to leave unnoticed.
now egwene shifted her cloak and smoothed her own goldembroidered, green silk dress and glanced
at elayne, in blue slashed with cream, hoping nynaeve had been right. so far, everyone had taken them
for petitioners, nobles, or at least women of wealth, but it seemed that they should stand out. she was
surprised to realize why; she felt uncomfortable in the fine dress after wearing a novices plain white for
the past few months.



a little cluster of village women in stout, dark woolens dropped curtsies as they passed. egwene glanced
back at min as soon as they were beyond. min had kept her breeches and baggy mans shirt under a
boys brown cloak and coat, with an old, widebrimmed hat pulled down over her short hair. one of us
has to be the servant, she had said, laughing. women dressed the way you are always have at least
one. youll wish you had my breeches if we have to run. she was burdened with four sets of saddlebags
bulging with warm clothes, for it would surely be winter before they returned. there were also packets of
food pilfered from the kitchens, enough to last until they could buy more.
are you sure i cant carry some of those, min? egwene asked softly.
theyre just awkward, min said with a grin, not heavy. she seemed to think it was all a game, or
else was pretending to think so. and people would be sure to wonder why a fine lady such as yourself
was carrying her own saddlebags. you can carry yours  and mine, too, if you want  once we  
her grin vanished, and she whispered fiercely, aes sedai!
egwene whipped her eyes forward. an aes sedai with long, smooth black hair and agedivory skin was
coming toward them down the corridor, listening to a woman wearing rough farm clothes and a patched
cloak. the aes sedai had not seen them yet, but egwene recognized her; takima, of the brown ajah,
who taught the history of the white tower and aes sedai, and who could recognize one of her pupils at
a hundred paces.
nynaeve turned down a side hall without breaking stride, but there one of the accepted, a lanky woman
with a permanent frown, hurried past them hauling a redfaced novice by the ear.
egwene had to swallow before she could speak. that was irella, and else. did they notice us? she
could not make herself look back to see.
no, min said after a moment. all they saw was our clothes. egwene let out a long, relieved breath,
and heard one from nynaeve, too.
my heart may burst before we reach the stables, elayne murmured. is this what an adventure is like
all the time, egwene? your heart in your mouth, and your stomach in your feet?
i suppose it is, egwene said slowly. she found it hard to think that there had been a time when she had
been eager to have an adventure, to do something dangerous and exciting like the people in stories. now
she thought the exciting part was what you remembered when you looked back, and the stories left out a
good deal of unpleasantness. she told elayne as much.
still, the daughterheir said firmly, i have never had any real excitement before, and never likely to as
long as mother has any say in it, which she will until i take the throne myself.
you two be quiet, nynaeve said. they were alone in the hall for a change, with no one in sight in either
direction. she pointed to a narrow flight of stairs going down. that should be what we want. if i havent
gotten turned around completely, with all the twists and turns weve made.
she took the stairs as if she were certain anyway, and the others followed. surely enough, the small door
at the bottom let out into the dusty yard of the south stable, where novices horses were kept, for those
who had them, until they had need of mounts again, which was generally not until they became accepted
or were sent home. the gleaming bulk of the tower itself rose behind them; the tower grounds spread
over a good many hides of land, with its own walls higher than some city walls.



nynaeve strode into the stable as if she owned it. it had a clean smell of hay and horse, and two long
rows of stalls ran back into shadows barred with light from the vents above. for a wonder, shaggy bela
and nynaeves gray mare stood in stalls near the doors. bela put her nose over the stall door and
whickered softly to egwene. there was only one groom in evidence, a pleasantlooking fellow with gray
in his beard, chewing a straw.
we will have our horses saddled, nynaeve told him in her most commanding tone. those two. min,
find your horse. and elaynes. min dropped the saddlebags and drew elayne deeper into the stables.
the stableman frowned after them and slowly took the straw from his mouth. there must be some
mistake, my lady. those animals  
  are ours, nynaeve said firmly, folding her arms so that the serpent ring was obvious. you will
saddle them now.
egwene held her breath; it was a lastditch plan, that nynaeve would try to pass as an aes sedai if they
had difficulties with anyone who might actually accept her as one. no aes sedai or accepted would, of
course, and probably not even a novice, but a stableman . . .
the man blinked at nynaeves ring, then at her. i was told two, he said at last, sounding unimpressed.
one of the accepted and a novice. wasnt nothing said about four of you.
egwene felt like laughing. of course liandrin would not have believed them able to get their horses by
themselves.
nynaeve looked disappointed, and her voice sharpened. you trot those horses out and saddle them, or
youll have need of liandrins healing, if she will give it to you.
the groom mouthed liandrins name, but one look at nynaeves face and he saw to the horses with no
more than a mutter or two, not loud enough for any but himself to hear. min and elayne came back with
their own mounts just as he finished tightening the second girth. mins was a tall dustcolored gelding,
elaynes a bay mare with an arched neck.
when they were mounted, nynaeve addressed herself to the stableman again. no doubt you were told
to keep this quiet, and that hasnt changed whether we are two or two hundred. if you think it has, think
about what liandrin will do if you talk what you were told to keep quiet.
as they were riding out, elayne tossed him a coin and murmured, for your trouble, goodman. you
have done well. outside, she caught egwenes eye and smiled. mother says a stick and honey always
work better than a stick alone.
i hope we dont need either with the guards, egwene said. i hope liandrin spoke to them, too.
at tarlomens gate, though, piercing the tall south wall of the tower grounds, there was no telling if
anyone had spoken to the guards or not. they waved the four women through with no more than a
glance and a cursory bow. guards were meant to keep out those who were dangerous; apparently these
had no orders about keeping anyone in.
a cool river breeze gave them an excuse to pull up the hoods of their cloaks as they rode slowly through
the streets of the city. the ring of their horses hooves on the paving stones was lost in the murmur of the
crowds filling the streets and the music that came from some of the buildings they passed. people dressed



in garments from every land, from the dark and somber mode of cairhien to the bright, brilliant colors of
the traveling people, and every style in between, split around the horsewomen like a river around a rock,
but they still could not move at more than a slow walk.
egwene gave no attention to the fabulous towers with their skyborne bridges or the buildings that
looked more like breaking waves, or windsculpted cliffs, or fanciful shells, than anything made from
stone. aes sedai often went into the city, and in that crowd they could come facetoface with one
before they knew it. after a time she realized the other women were keeping as close a watch as she, but
she still felt more than a glimmer of relief when the ogier grove came into view.
the great trees were now visible beyond the rooftops, their spreading tops a hundred spans and more
in the air. towering oaks and elms, leatherleafs and firs, were dwarfed beneath them. a wall of sorts
encompassed the grove, which was a good two miles across, but it was only an endless series of spiraling
stone arches, each five spans high and twice as wide. by the outer side of the wall, carriages, carts, and
people bustled along a street, while inside lay a wilderness of sorts. the grove had neither the tame look
of a park nor the complete haphazardness of the forest depths. rather, it seemed to be the ideal of
nature, as if this were the perfect woods, the most beautiful forest that could be. some of the leaves had
already begun to turn, and even the small swathes of orange and yellow and red among the green seemed
to egwene to be exactly the way autumn foliage should look.
a few people strolled just inside the open arches, and no one looked twice when the four women rode
in under the trees. the city was quickly lost to view, even the sounds of it softened, then blocked, by the
grove. in the space of ten strides they seemed to be miles from the nearest town.
the north edge of the grove, she said, nynaeve muttered, peering around. there isnt any point of it
further north than   she cut off as two horses burst from a copse of black elder, a dark, glossy mare
with a rider and a lightly laden packhorse.
the dark mare reared, pawing the air, as liandrin reined her harshly. the aes sedais face wore fury
like a mask. i told you not to tell anyone of this! not anyone! egwene noticed polelanterns on the
packhorse, and thought it odd.
these are friends, nynaeve began, her back stiffening, but elayne broke in on her.
forgive us, liandrin sedai. they did not tell us; we overheard. we did not mean to listen to anything
we should not have, but we did overhear. and we want to help rand althor, too. and the other boys,
of course, she added quickly.
liandrin peered at elayne and min. the late afternoon sunlight, slanting through the branches, shadowed
their faces beneath the hoods of their cloaks. so, she said finally, still watching those two. i had made
arrangements for you to be taken care of, but as you are here, you are here. four can make this journey
as well as two.
taken care of, liandrin sedai? elayne said. i do not understand.
child, you and that other are known as friends of these two. do you not think there are those who
would question you when they are found to be gone? do you believe the black ajah would be gentle
with you just because you are heir to a throne? had you remained in the white tower, you might not
have lived the night. that silenced them all for a moment, but liandrin wheeled her horse and called,
follow me!



the aes sedai led them deeper into the grove, until they came to a tall fence of stout ironwork topped
with a hedge of razorsharp spikes. curving slightly, as if it enclosed a large area, the fence ran out of
sight among the trees to left and right. there was a gate in the fence, secured with a big lock. liandrin
unfastened this with a large key she produced from her cloak, motioned them through, then relocked it
behind them and rode on ahead immediately. a squirrel chittered at them from a branch overhead, and
from somewhere came the sharp drumming of a woodpecker.
where are we going? nynaeve demanded. liandrin did not answer, and nynaeve looked angrily at
the others. why are we just riding deeper into these woods? we have to cross a bridge, or else take
ship, if were going to leave tar valon, and there isnt any bridge or ship in  
there is this, liandrin announced. the fence, it keeps away those who might harm themselves, but
we have a need this day. what she gestured to was a tall, thick slab of what seemed to be stone,
standing on edge, one side carved intricately in vines and leaves.
egwenes throat tightened; suddenly she knew why liandrin had brought lanterns, and she did not like
what she knew. she heard nynaeve whisper, a waygate. they both remembered the ways all too
well.
we did it once, she told herself as much as nynaeve. we can do it again.if rand and the others
need us, we have to help them. thats all there is to it.
is that really . . .? min began in a choked voice and could not finish.
a waygate, elayne breathed. i did not think the ways could be used any longer. at least, i did not
think their use was allowed.
liandrin had already dismounted and plucked the trefoilavendesora leaf out of the carving; like two
huge doors woven of living vines, the gates were swinging open, revealing what appeared to be a dull,
silvery mirror that gave their reflections back dimly.
you do not have to come, liandrin said. you can wait here for me, safely enclosed by the fence until
i come for you. or perhaps the black ajah will find you before anyone else. her smile was not
pleasant. behind her, the waygate came open to its fullest and stopped.
i did not say i wouldnt come, elayne said, but she gave the shadowed woods a lingering look.
if we are going to do this, min said hoarsely, then lets do it. she was staring at the waygate, and
egwene thought she heard her mutter, the light burn you, rand althor.
i must go last, liandrin said. all of you, in. i will follow. she was eyeing the woods now, too, as if
she thought someone might be following them. quickly! quickly!
egwene did not know what liandrin expected to see, but if anyone at all came they would probably
stop them from using the waygate.rand, you woolheaded idiot, she thought, why cant you just
once get yourself into some kind of trouble that doesnt force me to act like the heroine in a story?
she dug her heels into belas flanks, and the shaggy mare, restive from too much time in a stable, leaped
forward.
slowly! nynaeve shouted, but it was too late.



egwene and bela surged toward their own dull reflections; two shaggy horses touched noses, appeared
to flow into each other. then egwene was merging into her own image with an icy shock. time seemed
to stretch out, as if the cold crept over her by the width of one hair at a time, and every hair took minutes.
suddenly bela was stumbling in pitchblackness, moving so fast the mare almost pitched over on her
head. she caught herself and stood trembling as egwene dismounted hurriedly, feeling the mares legs in
the dark to see if she had been hurt. she was almost glad of the dark, to hide her crimson face. she
knew that time as well as distance were different the other side of a waygate; she had moved before
thinking.
there was only the blackness around her in every direction, except for the rectangle of the open
waygate, like a window of smoked glass when seen from this side. it let no light in  the black seemed
to press right up against it  but through it egwene could see the others, moving by the slowest
increments, like figures in a nightmare. nynaeve was insisting on handing around the polelanterns and
lighting them; liandrin was acceding with a bad grace, apparently insisting on speed.
when nynaeve came though the waygate  leading her gray mare slowly, ever so slowly  egwene
almost ran to hug her, and at least half of her feeling was for the lantern nynaeve carried. the lantern
made a smaller pool of light than it should have  the darkness pressed against the light, trying to force it
back into the lantern  but egwene had begun to feel that darkness pressing against her, as if it had
weight. instead, she contented herself with saying, belas all right, and i did not break my neck the way
i deserved to.
once there had been light along the ways, before the taint on the power with which they had first been
made, the taint of the dark one onsaidin , had begun to corrupt them.
nynaeve thrust the pole of the lantern into her hands and turned to pull another from under her saddle
girth. as long as you know you deserved to, she murmured, then you didnt deserve to. suddenly
she chuckled. sometimes i think it was sayings like that more than anything else that created the title of
wisdom. well, heres another. you break your neck, and ill see it mended just so i can break it again.
it was said lightly, and egwene found herself laughing, too  until she recalled where she was.
nynaeves amusement did not last long either.
min and elayne came though the waygate hesitantly, leading their horses and carrying lanterns,
obviously expecting to find monsters waiting at the least. they looked relieved, at first, to find nothing but
darkness, but the oppressiveness of it soon had them shifting nervously from foot to foot. liandrin
replaced theavendesora leaf and rode through the closing waygate leading the packhorse.
liandrin did not wait for the gate to finish closing, but tossed the lead line of the packhorse to min
without a word and started along a white line, dimly made out by the light of her lantern, leading into the
ways. the floor seemed to be stone, eaten and pitted by acid. egwene scrambled hurriedly onto belas
back, but she was no quicker to follow the aes sedai than anyone else. there seemed to be nothing in
the world except the rough floor under the horses hooves.
straight as an arrow the white line led through the dark to a large stone slab covered with ogier script
inlaid in silver. the same pocking that marked the floor also broke the script in places.
a guiding, elayne murmured, twisting in her saddle to look around uneasily. elaida taught me a little
about the ways. she would not say much. not enough, she added glumly. or maybe too much.



calmly liandrin compared the guiding with a parchment, then stuffed it back into a pocket of her cloak
before egwene could get a look.
their lanterns light stopped abruptly rather than fading out at the edges, but it was enough for egwene
to see a thick stone balustrade, eaten away in places, as the aes sedai led them away from the guiding.
an island, elayne called it; the darkness made judging the islands size difficult, but egwene thought it
might be a hundred paces across.
stone bridges and ramps pierced the balustrade, each with a stone post beside it marked with a single
line in ogier script. the bridges seemed to arch out into nothing. the ramps led up or down. it was
impossible to see more than the beginning of any of them, as they rode past.
pausing only to eye the stone posts, liandrin took a ramp that led down, and quickly there was nothing
but the ramp and the darkness. a dampening silence hung over everything; egwene had the feeling that
even the clatter of the horses hooves on the rough stone did not travel very far beyond the light.
down and down the ramp ran, curving back on itself, until it reached another island, with its broken
balustrade between bridges and ramps, its guiding that liandrin compared with her parchment. the
island seemed like solid stone, just as the first one had. egwene wished she was not sure that the first
island was directly over their heads.
nynaeve spoke up suddenly, voicing egwenes thoughts. her voice sounded steady, but she paused to
swallow in the middle of it.
it  it might be, elayne said faintly. her eyes rolled upwards, and quickly dropped again. elaida says
the rules of nature do not hold in the ways. at least, not the way they do outside.
light! min muttered, then raised her voice. how long do you mean us to stay in here?
the aes sedais honeycolored braids swung as she turned to regard them. until i take you out, she
said flatly. the more you bother me, the longer that will be. she bent back to studying the parchment
and the guiding.
egwene and the others fell silent.
liandrin pushed on from guiding to guiding, by ramps and bridges that seemed to run unsupported
through the endless dark. the aes sedai paid very little heed to the rest of them, and egwene found
herself wondering whether liandrin would turn back to search if one of them fell behind. the others
perhaps had the same thought, for they all rode bunched tightly on the dark mares heels.
egwene was surprised to realize that she still felt the attraction ofsaidar , both the presence of the female
half of the true source and the desire to touch it, to channel its flow. somehow, she had thought the
shadows taint on the ways would hide it from her. she could sense that taint, after a fashion. it was
faint and had nothing to do withsaidar , but she was sure that reaching for the true source here would
be like baring her arm to foul, greasy smoke in order to reach a clean cup. whatever she did would be
tainted. for the first time in weeks she had no trouble at all in resisting the attraction ofsaidar.
it was well into what would have been night in the world outside the ways when, on an island, liandrin
abruptly dismounted and announced that they would halt for supper and sleep, and that there was food
on the packhorse.



parcel it out, she said, not bothering to assign the task. it will take us the better part of two days to
reach toman head. i would not have you arrive hungry if you were too foolish to bring food yourselves.
briskly she unsaddled and hobbled her mare, but then she sat down on her saddle and waited for one of
them to bring her something to eat.
elayne took liandrin her flatbread and cheese. the aes sedai made it obvious that she did not want
their company, so the rest of them ate their bread and cheese a little apart from her, sitting on their
saddles drawn close together. the darkness beyond their lanterns made a poor sauce.
after a time, egwene said, liandrin sedai, what if we encounter the black wind? min mouthed the
word questioningly, but elayne gave a squeak. moiraine sedai said it could not be killed, or even hurt
very much, and i can feel the taint on this place waiting to twist anything we do with the power.
you will not so much as think of the source unless i tell you to, liandrin said sharply. why, if one
such as you tried to channel here, in the ways, you might well go as mad as a man. you have not the
training to deal with the taint of those men who made this. if the black wind appears, i will deal with it.
she pursed her lips, studying a lump of white cheese. moiraine does not know so much as she thinks.
she popped the cheese into her mouth with a smile.
i do not like her, egwene muttered, low enough to make sure the aes sedai could not hear.
if moiraine can work with her, nynaeve said quietly, so can we. not that i like moiraine any better
than i do liandrin, but if theyre meddling with rand and the others again . . . she fell silent, hitching her
cloak up. the darkness was not cold, but it seemed as if it should be.
what is this black wind? min asked. when elayne had explained, with a great deal of what elaida
had said and what her mother had said, min sighed. the pattern has a great deal to answer for. i dont
know that any man is worth this.
you did not have to come, egwene reminded her. you could have gone at any time. no one would
have tried to stop you leaving the tower.
oh, i could have wandered off, min said wryly. as easily as you, or elayne. the pattern doesnt
much care what we want, egwene, what if, after all you are going through for him, rand doesnt marry
you? what if he marries some woman youve never seen before, or elayne, or me? what then?
elayne chortled. mother would never approve.
egwene was silent for a time. rand might not live to marry anyone. and if he did . . . she could not
imagine rand hurting anyone.not even after hes gone mad? there had to be some way to stop that,
some way to change it; aes sedai knew so much, could do so much.if they could stop it, why dont
they? the only answer was because they could not, and that was not the one she wanted.
she tried to put lightness in her voice. i dont suppose i will marry him. aes sedai seldom do marry,
you know. but i would not set my heart on him if were you. or you, elayne. i do not think . . . her
voice caught, and she coughed to cover it. i do not think he will ever marry. but if he does, i wish well
to whoever ends up with him, even one of you. she thought she sounded as if she meant it. he is
stubborn as a mule, and wrongheaded to a fault, but heis gentle. her voice shook, but she managed to
turn the quaver into a laugh.



however much you say you do not care, elayne said, i think youd approve less than mother would.
he is interesting, egwene. more interesting than any man ive ever met, even if he is a shepherd. if you
are silly enough to throw him away, you will have only yourself to blame if i decide to face down you and
mother both. it would not be the first time the prince of andor had no title before he wed. but you wont
be that silly, so dont try to pretend you will. no doubt you will choose the green ajah, and make him
one of your warders. the only greens i know with only one warder are married to them.
egwene made herself go along with it, saying if she did become a green she would have ten warders.
min watched her, frowning, and nynaeve watched min thoughtfully. they all fell silent by the time they
changed into more suitable clothes for traveling, from their saddlebags. it was not easy, keeping spirits up
in that place.
sleep came slowly to egwene, fitfully, and it was filled with bad dreams. she did not dream of rand, but
of the man whose eyes were fire. his face was not masked this time, and it was horrible with almost
healed burns. he only looked at her and laughed, but that was worse than the dreams that followed, the
dreams of being lost in the ways forever, the ones where the black wind was chasing her. she was
grateful when the toe of liandrins riding boot dug into her ribs to waken her; she felt as if she had not
slept at all.
liandrin pushed them hard through the next day, or what passed for day, with only their lanterns for a
sun, not letting them stop for sleep until they were swaying in their saddles. stone made a hard bed, but
liandrin roused them ruthlessly after a few hours, hardly waiting for them to mount before riding on.
ramps and bridges, islands and guidings. egwene saw so many of them in that pitchdark that she lost
count. she had long since lost any count of hours or of days. liandrin allowed only brief halts to eat and
rest the horses, and the darkness weighed down on their shoulders. they slumped in their saddles like
sacks of grain, except for liandrin. the aes sedai seemed unaffected by tiredness, or the dark. she was
as fresh as she had been back in the white tower, and as cold. she would not let anyone glimpse the
parchment she compared to the guidings, stuffing it away with a curt, it is nothing you would
understand, when nynaeve asked.
and then, while egwene blinked wearily, liandrin was riding away from a guiding, not toward another
bridge or ramp, but down a pitted white line that led off into the darkness. egwene stared at her friends,
and then they all hurried to follow. ahead, by the light of her lantern, the aes sedai was already removing
theavendesora leaf from the carvings on a waygate.
we are here, liandrin said, smiling. i have brought you at last to where you must go.

chapter 40

damane



egwene dismounted as the waygate opened, and when liandrin motioned them through, she led the
shaggy mare carefully out. even so, she and bela both stumbled in brush flattened by the opening
waygate as they suddenly seemed to be moving even more slowly. a screen of dense shrubs had
surrounded and hidden the waygate. there were only a few trees close by, and a morning breeze ruffled
foliage with a little more color than the leaves had had in tar valon.
watching her friends emerge after her, she had been standing there a good minute before she became
aware that others were already there, just out of sight on the other side of the gates. when she did notice
them she stared uncertainly; they were as odd a group as she had ever seen, and she had heard too many
rumors of the war on toman head.
armored men, at least fifty of them, with overlapping steel plates down their chests and dull black
helmets shaped like insects heads, sat their saddles or stood beside their horses, staring at her and the
emerging women, staring at the waygate, muttering among themselves. the only bareheaded man among
them, a tall, darkfaced, hooknosed fellow standing with a gildedandpainted helmet on his hip, looked
astonished at what he was seeing. there were women with the soldiers, too. two wore plain, dark gray
dresses and wide silver collars, and stood staring intently at those coming out of the waygate, each with
another woman close behind her as if ready to speak into her ear. two other women, standing a little
apart, wore wide, divided skirts that came well short of their ankles, and panels embroidered with forked
lightning bolts on their bosoms and skirts. oddest of all was the last woman, reclining on a palanquin
borne by eight muscular, barechested men in baggy black trousers. the sides of her scalp were shaved
so that only a wide crest of black hair remained to fall down her back. a long, creamcolored robe
worked in flowers and birds on blue ovals was carefully arranged to show her skirts of pleated white,
and her fingernails were a good inch long, the first two on each hand lacquered blue.
liandrin sedai, egwene asked uneasily, do you know who these people are? her friends fingered
their reins as if wondering whether to mount and run, but liandrin replaced theavendesora leaf and
stepped forward confidently as the waygate began to close.
the high lady suroth? liandrin said, making it halfway between a question and statement.
the women on the palanquin nodded fractionally. you are liandrin. her speech was slurred, and it
took egwene a moment to understand. aes sedai, suroth added with a twist to her lips, and a murmur
rose among the soldiers. we must be done here quickly, liandrin. there are patrols, and it would not
do to be found. you would enjoy the attentions of the seekers for truth no more than i. i mean to be
back in falme before turak knows i am gone.
what are you talking about? nynaeve demanded. what is she talking about, liandrin?
liandrin laid a hand on nynaeves shoulder and one on egwenes. these are the two of whom you
were told. and there is another. she nodded toward elayne. she is the daughterheir of andor.
the two women with the lightning on their dresses were approaching the party in front of the waygate
 they carried coils of some silvery metal in their hands, egwene noticed  and the bareheaded soldier
came with them. he did not put a hand near the sword hilt sticking up above his shoulder, and he wore a
casual smile, but egwene still watched him narrowly. liandrin gave no sign of agitation; otherwise
egwene would have jumped onto bela right then.



liandrin sedai, she said urgently, who are these people? are they here to help rand and the others,
too?
the hooknosed man suddenly seized min and elayne by the scruffs of their necks, and in the next
instant everything seemed to happen at once. the man yelled a curse, and a woman screamed, or
perhaps more than one woman; egwene could not be sure. abruptly the breeze was a gale that whipped
away liandrins angry shout in clouds of dirt and leaves and made the trees bend and groan. horses
reared and whinnied shrilly. and one of the women reached out and fastened something around
egwenes neck.
cloak flapping like a sail, egwene braced against the wind and tugged at what felt like a collar of smooth
metal. it would not budge; under her frantic fingers, it felt all of one piece, though she knew it had to have
some kind of clasp. the silvery coils the woman had carried now trailed over egwenes shoulder, their
other end joining a bright bracelet on the womans left wrist. balling her fist tightly, egwene hit the woman
as hard as she could, right in her eye  and staggered and fell to her knees herself, head ringing. it felt as
if a large man had struck her in the face.
when she could see straight once more, the wind had died. a number of horses wandered loose, bela
and elaynes mare among them, and some of the soldiers were cursing and picking themselves up off the
ground. liandrin was calmly brushing dust and leaves from her dress. min knelt, supporting herself with
her hands, groggily trying to rise further. the hooknosed man stood over her, his hand dripping blood.
mins knife lay just out of her reach, the blade stained red along one side. nynaeve and elayne were
nowhere to be seen, and nynaeves mare was gone, too. so were some of the soldiers, and one of the
pairs of women. the other two were still there, and egwene could see now that they were linked by a
silver cord just like the one that still joined her to the woman standing over her.
that woman was rubbing her cheek as she squatted beside egwene; there was a bruise already coming
up around her left eye. with long, dark hair and big brown eyes, she was pretty, and perhaps as much as
ten years older than nynaeve. your first lesson, she said emphatically. there was no animosity in her
voice, but what almost sounded like friendliness. i will not punish you further this time, since i should
have been on guard with a newly caughtdamane . know this. you are adamane , a leashed one, and i
am asuldam , a holder of the leash. whendamane andsuldam are joined, whatever hurt thesuldam
feels, thedamane feels twice over. even to death. so you must remember that you may never strike at a
suldam in any way, and you must protect yoursuldam even more than yourself. i am renna. how are
you called?
i am not . . . what you said, egwene muttered. she pulled at the collar again; it gave no more than
before. she thought of knocking the woman down and trying to pry the bracelet from her wrist, but
rejected it. even if the soldiers did not try to stop her  and so far they seemed to be ignoring her and
renna altogether  she had the sinking feeling the woman was telling the truth. touching her left eye
brought a wince; it did not feel puffy, so perhaps she was not actually growing a bruise to match rennas,
but it still hurt. her left eye, and rennas left eye. she raised her voice. liandrin sedai? why are you
letting them do this? liandrin dusted her hands together, never looking in her direction.
the very first thing you must learn, renna said, is to do exactly as you are told, and without delay.
egwene gasped. suddenly her skin burned and prickled as if she had rolled in stinging nettles, from the
soles of her feet to her scalp. she tossed her head as the burning sensation increased.
manysuldam , renna went on in that almost friendly tone, do not believedamane should be allowed
names, or at least only names they are given. but i am the one who took you, so i will be in charge of



your training, and i will allow you to keep your own name. if you do not displease me too far. i am mildly
upset with you now. do you really wish to keep on until i am angry?
quivering, egwene gritted her teeth. her nails dug into her palms with the effort of not scratching wildly.
idiot! its only your name . egwene, she managed to get out. i am egwene alvere. instantly the
burning itch was gone. she let out a long, unsteady breath.
egwene, renna said. that is a good name. and to egwenes horror, renna patted her on the head
as she would a dog.
that, she realized, was what she had detected in the womans voice  a certain good will for a dog in
training, not quite the friendliness one might have toward another human being.
renna chuckled. now you are even angrier. if you intend to strike at me again, remember to make it a
small blow, for you will feel it twice as hard as i. do not attempt to channel; that you will never do
without my express command.
egwenes eye throbbed. she pushed herself to her feet and tried to ignore renna, as much as it was
possible to ignore someone who held a leash fastened to a collar around your neck. her cheeks burned
when the other woman chuckled again. she wanted to go to min, but the amount of leash renna had let
out would not reach that far. she called softly, min, are you all right?
sitting slowly back on her heels, min nodded, then put a hand to her head as if she wished she had not
moved it.
jagged lightning crackled across the clear sky, then struck among the trees some distance off. egwene
jumped, and suddenly smiled. nynaeve was still free, and elayne. if anyone could free her and min,
nynaeve could. her smile faded into a glare for liandrin. for whatever the reason the aes sedai had
betrayed them, there would be a reckoning.someday. somehow . the glare did no good; liandrin did
not look away from the palanquin.
the barechested men knelt, lowering the palanquin to the ground, and suroth stepped down, carefully
arranging her robe, then picked her way to liandrin on softslippered feet. the two women were much
of a size. brown eyes stared levelly into black.
you were to bring me two, suroth said. instead, i have only one, while two run loose, one of them
more powerful by far than i had been led to believe. she will attract every patrol of ours within two
leagues.
i brought you three, liandrin said calmly. if you cannot manage to hold them, perhaps our master
should find another among you to serve him. you take fright at trifles. if patrols come, kill them.
lightning flashed again in the near distance, and moments later something roared like thunder not far
from where it struck; a cloud of dust rose into the air. neither liandrin nor suroth took any notice.
i could still return to falme with two newdamane , suroth said. it grieves me to allow an . . . aes
sedai  she twisted the words like a curse  to walk free.
liandrins face did not change, but egwene saw a nimbus abruptly glow around her.
beware, high lady, renna called. she stands ready!



there was a stir among the soldiers, a reaching for swords and lances, but suroth only steepled her
hands, smiling at liandrin over her long nails. you will make no move against me, liandrin. our master
would disapprove, as i am surely needed here more than you, and you fear him more than you fear being
madedamane .
liandrin smiled, though white spots marked her cheeks with anger. and you, suroth, fear him more
than you fear me burning you to a cinder where you stand.
just so. we both fear him. yet even our masters needs will change with time. allmarathdamane will
be leashed eventually. perhaps i will be the one who places the collar around your lovely throat.
as you say, suroth. our masters needs will change. i will remind you of it on the day when you kneel
to me.
a tall leatherleaf perhaps a mile away suddenly became a roaring torch.
this grows tiresome, suroth said. elbar, recall them. the hooknosed man produced a horn no
bigger than his fist; it made a hoarse, piercing cry.
you must find the woman nynaeve, liandrin said sharply. elayne is of no importance, but both the
woman and this girl here must be taken with you on your ships when you sail.
i know very well what has been commanded,marathdamane , though i would give much to know
why.
however much you were told, child, liandrin sneered, that is how much you are allowed to know.
remember that you serve and obey. these two must be removed to the other side of the aryth ocean
and kept there.
suroth sniffed. i will not remain here to find this nynaeve. my usefulness to our master will be at an end
if turak hands me over to the seekers for truth. liandrin opened her mouth angrily, but suroth refused
to allow her a word. the woman will not remain free for long. neither of them will. when we sail again,
we will take with us every woman on this miserable spit of land who can channel even slightly, leashed
and collared. if you wish to remain and search for her, do so. patrols will be here soon, thinking to
engage the rabble that still hides in the countryside. some patrols takedamane with them, and they will
not care what master you serve. should you survive the encounter, the leash and collar will teach you a
new life, and i do not believe our master will trouble to deliver one foolish enough to let herself be taken.
if either is allowed to remain here, liandrin said tightly, our master will trouble himself with you,
suroth. take them both, or pay the price. she strode to the waygate, clutching the reins of her mare.
soon it was closing behind her.
the soldiers who had gone after nynaeve and elayne came galloping back with the two women linked
by leash, collar, and bracelet, thedamane and thesuldam riding side by side. three men led horses with
bodies across the saddles. egwene felt a surge of hope when she realized the bodies all wore armor.
they had not caught nynaeve or elayne, either one.
min started to rise to her feet, but the hooknosed man planted a boot between her shoulder blades and
drove her to the ground. gasping for breath, she twitched there weakly. i beg permission to speak, high
lady, he said. suroth made a small motion with her hand, and he went on. this peasant cut me, high



lady. if the high lady has no use for her . . .? suroth motioned slightly again, already turning away, and
he reached over his shoulder for the hilt of his sword.
no! egwene shouted. she heard renna curse softly, and suddenly the burning itch covered her skin
again, worse than before, but she did not stop. please! high lady, please! she is my friend! pain such
as she had never known wracked her through the burning. every muscle knotted and cramped; she
pitched on her face in the dirt, mewling, but she could still see elbars heavy, curved blade come free of
its sheath, see him raise it with both hands. please! oh, min!
abruptly, the pain was gone as if it had never been; only the memory remained. suroths blue velvet
slippers, dirtstained now, appeared in front of her face, but it was at elbar that she stared. he stood
there with his sword over his head and all his weight on the foot on mins back . . . and he did not move.
this peasant is your friend? suroth said.
egwene started to rise, but at a surprised arching of suroths eyebrow, she remained lying where she
was and only raised her head. she had to save min.if it means groveling . . . she parted her lips and
hoped her gritted teeth would pass for a smile. yes, high lady.
and if i spare her, if i allow her to visit you occasionally, you will work hard and learn as you are
taught?
i will, high lady. she would have promised much more to keep that sword from splitting mins skull.
ill even keep it , she thought sourly,as long as i have to.
put the girl on her horse, elbar, suroth said. tie her on, if she cannot sit her saddle. if thisdamane
proves a disappointment, perhaps then i will let you have the head of the girl. she was already moving
toward her palanquin.
renna pulled egwene roughly to her feet and pushed her toward bela, but egwene had eyes only for
min. elbar was no gentler with min than renna with her, but she thought min was all right. at least min
shrugged off elbars attempt to tie her across her saddle and climbed onto her gelding with only a little
help.
the odd party started off, westward, with suroth leading and elbar slightly to the rear of her palanquin,
but close enough to heed any summons immediately. renna and egwene rode at the back with min, and
the othersuldam anddamane , behind the soldiers. the woman who had apparently meant to collar
nynaeve fondled the coiled silver leash she still carried and looked angry. sparse forest covered the
rolling land, and the smoke of the burning leatherleaf was soon only a smudge in the sky behind them.
you were honored, renna said after a time, having the high lady speak to you. another time, i
would let you wear a ribbon to mark the honor. but since you brought her attention on yourself . . .
egwene cried out as a switch seemed to lash across her back, then another across her leg, her arm.
from every direction they seemed to come; she knew there was nothing to block, but she could not help
throwing her arms about as if to stop the blows. she bit her lip to stifle her moans, but tears still rolled
down her cheeks. bela whinnied and danced, but rennas grip on the silver leash kept her from carrying
egwene away. none of the soldiers even looked back.
what are you doing to her? min shouted. egwene? stop it!



you live on sufferance . . . min, is it? renna said mildly. let this be a lesson for you as well. so long
as you try to interfere, it will not stop.
min raised a fist, then let it fall. i wont interfere. only, please, stop it. egwene, im sorry.
the unseen blows went on for a few moments more, as if to show min her intervention had done
nothing, then ceased, but egwene could not stop shuddering. the pain did not go away this time. she
pushed back the sleeve of her dress, thinking to see weals; her skin was unmarked, but the feel of them
was still there. she swallowed. it was not your fault, min. bela tossed her head, eyes rolling, and
egwene patted the mares shaggy neck. it wasnt yours, either.
it was your fault, egwene, renna said. she sounded so patient, dealing so kindly with someone who
was too dense to see the right, that egwene wanted to scream. when adamane is punished, it is always
her fault, even if she does not know why. adamane must anticipate what hersuldam wants. but this
time, you do know why.damane are like furniture, or tools, always there ready to be used, but never
pushing themselves forward for attention. especially not for the attention of one of the blood.
egwene bit her lip until she tasted blood.this is a nightmare. it cant be real. why did liandrin do
this? why it this happening? may . . . may i ask a question?
of me, you may. renna smiled. manysuldam will wear your bracelet over the years  there are
always many moresuldam thandamane  and some would have your hide in strips if you took your
eyes off the floor or opened your mouth without permission, but i see no reason not to let you speak, so
long as you are careful in what you say. one of the othersuldam snorted loudly; she was linked to a
pretty, darkhaired woman in her middle years who kept her eyes on her hands.
liandrin  egwene would not give her the honorific, not ever again  and the high lady spoke of a
master they both serve. the thought came into her head of a man with almost healed burns marring his
face, and eyes and mouth that sometimes turned to fire, but even if he was only a figure in her dreams that
seemed too horrible to contemplate. who is he? what does he want with me and  and min? she
knew it was silly to avoid naming nynaeve  she did not think any of these people would forget her just
because her name was not mentioned, especially the blueeyedsuldam stroking her empty leash  but
it was the only way she could think of fighting back at the moment.
the affairs of the blood, renna said, are not for me to take notice of, and certainly not for you. the
high lady will tell me what she wishes me to know, and i will tell you what i wish you to know. anything
else that you hear or see must be to you as if it never was said, as if it never happened. this way lies
safety, most especially for adamane .damane are too valuable to be killed out of hand, but you might
find yourself not only soundly punished, but absent a tongue to speak or hands to write.damane can do
what they must without these things.
egwene shivered, though the air was not very cold. pulling her cloak up onto her shoulders, her hand
brushed the leash, and she jerked at it fitfully. this is a horrible thing. how can you do this to anyone?
what diseased mind ever thought of it?
the blueeyedsuldam with the empty leash growled, this one could do without her tongue already,
renna.
renna only smiled patiently. how is it horrible? could we allow anyone to run loose who can do what
adamane can? sometimes men are born who would bemarathdamane if they were women  it is so
here also, i have heard  and they must be killed, of course, but the women do not go mad. better for



them to becomedamane than make trouble contending for power. as for the mind that first thought of
theadam , it was the mind of a woman who called herself aes sedai.
egwene knew incredulity must be painting her face, because renna laughed openly. when luthair
paendrag mondwin, son of the hawkwing, first faced the armies of the night, he found many among
them who called themselves aes sedai. they contended for power among themselves and used the one
power on the field of battle. one such, a woman named deain, who thought she could do better serving
the emperor  he was not emperor then, of course  since he had no aes sedai in his armies, came to
him with a device she had made, the firstadam , fastened to the neck of one of her sisters. though that
woman did not want to serve luthair, theadam required her to serve. deain made moreadam , the first
suldam were found, and women captured who called themselves aes sedai discovered that they were
in fact onlymarathdamane , those who must be leashed. it is said that when she herself was leashed,
deains screams shook the towers of midnight, but of course she, too, was amarathdamane , and
marathdamane cannot be allowed to run free. perhaps you will be one of those who has the ability to
makeadam . if so, you will be pampered, you may rest assured.
egwene looked yearningly at the countryside through which they rode. the land was beginning to rise in
low hills, and the thin forest had dwindled to scattered thickets, but she was sure she could lose herself in
them. am i supposed to look forward to being pampered like a pet dog? she said bitterly. a lifetime
of being chained to men and women who think i am some kind of animal?
not men. renna chuckled. allsuldam are women. if a man put on this bracelet, most of the time it
would be no different than if it were hanging on a peg on the wall.
and sometimes, the blueeyedsuldam put in harshly, you and he would both die screaming. the
woman had sharp features and a tight, thinlipped mouth, and egwene realized that anger was apparently
her permanent expression. from time to time the empress plays with lords by linking them to adamane .
it makes the lords sweat and entertains the court of the nine moons. the lord never knows until it is
done whether he will live or die, and neither does thedamane .  her laugh was vicious.
only the empress can afford to wastedamane in such a way, alwhin, renna snapped, and i do not
mean to train thisdamane only to have her thrown away.
i have not seen any training at all so far, renna. only a great deal of chatter, as if you and thisdamane
were girlhood friends.
perhaps it is time to see what she can do, renna said, studying egwene. do you have enough control
yet to channel at that distance? she pointed to a tall oak standing alone on a hilltop.
egwene frowned at the tree, perhaps half a mile from the line followed by the soldiers and suroths
palanquin. she had never tried anything much beyond arms reach, but she thought it might be possible.
i dont know, she said.
try, renna told her. feel the tree. feel the sap in the tree. i want you to make it all not only hot, but
so hot that every drop of sap in every branch flashes to steam in an instant. do it.
egwene was shocked to discover an urge to do as renna commanded. she had not channeled, or even
touchedsaidar , in two days; the desire to fill herself with the one power made her shiver. i  in half a
heartbeat she discarded will not; the weals that were not there still burned too sharply for her to be
quite that foolish  cannot, she finished instead. it is too far, and ive never done anything like that
before.



one of thesuldam laughed raucously, and alwhin said, she never even tried.
renna shook her head almost sadly. when one has been asuldam long enough, she told egwene,
one learns to tell many things aboutdamane even without the bracelet, but with the bracelet one can
always tell whether adamane has tried to channel. you must never lie to me, or to anysuldam , not even
by a hair.
suddenly the invisible switches were back, striking at her everywhere. yelling, she tried to hit renna, but
thesuldam casually knocked her fist away, and egwene felt as if renna had hit her arm with a stick. she
dug her heels into belas flanks, but thesuldam s grip on the leash nearly pulled her out of her saddle.
frantically she reached forsaidar , meaning to hurt renna enough to make her stop, just the kind of hurt
she herself had been given. thesuldam shook her head wryly; egwene howled as her own skin was
suddenly scalded. not until she fled fromsaidar completely did the burn begin to fade, and the unseen
blows never ceased or slowed. she tried to shout that she would try, if only renna would stop, but all
she could manage was to scream and writhe.
dimly, she was aware of min shouting angrily and trying to ride to her side, of alwhin tearing mins reins
from her hands, of anothersuldam speaking sharply to herdamane , who looked at min. and then min
was yelling, too, arms flapping as if trying to ward off blows or beat away stinging insects. in her own
pain, mins seemed distant.
their cries together were enough to make some of the soldiers twist in their saddles. after one look,
they laughed and turned back. howsuldam dealt withdamane was no affair of theirs.
to egwene it seemed to go on forever, but at last there was an end. she lay sprawled weakly across the
cantle of her saddle, cheeks wet with tears, sobbing into belas mane. the mare whickered uneasily.
it is good that you have spirit, renna said calmly. the bestdamane are those who have spirit to be
shaped and molded.
egwene squeezed her eyes shut. she wished she could close her ears, too, to shut out rennas voice.i
have to get away. i have to, but how? nynaeve, help me. light, somebody help me.
you will be one of the best, renna said in tones of satisfaction. her hand stroked egwenes hair, a
mistress soothing her dog.
nynaeve leaned out of her saddle to peer around the screen of prickly leafed shrubs. scattered trees
met her eyes, some with leaves turning color. the expanses of grass and brush between seemed empty.
nothing moved that she could see except the thinning column of smoke, wavering in a breeze, from the
leatherleaf.
that had been her work, the leatherleaf, and once the lightning called from a clear sky, and a few other
things she had not thought to try until those two women tried them on her. she thought they must work
together in some way, though she could not understand their relation to each other, apparently leashed as
they were. one wore a collar, but the other was chained as surely as she. what nynaeve was sure of
was that one or both were aes sedai. she had never had a clear enough sight of them to see the glow of
channeling, but it had to be.
ill certainly take pleasure in telling sheriam about them, she thought dryly.aes sedai dont use the
power as a weapon, do they?



she certainly had. she had at least knocked the two women down with that lightning strike, and she had
seen one of the soldiers, or his body rather, burn from the ball of fire she made and hurled at them. but
she had not seen any of the strangers at all in some time now.
sweat beaded on her forehead, and it was not all from exertion. her contact withsaidar was gone, and
she could not bring it back. in that first fury of knowing that liandrin had betrayed them,saidar had been
there almost before she knew it, the one power flooding her. it had seemed she could do anything. and
as long as they had chased her, rage at being hunted like an animal had fueled her. now the chase had
vanished. the longer she had gone without seeing an enemy at whom she could strike, the more she had
begun to worry that they might be sneaking up on her somehow, and the more she had had time to worry
about what was happening to egwene, and elayne, and min. now she was forced to admit that what she
felt most was fear. fear for them, fear for herself. it was anger she needed.
something stirred behind a tree.
her breath caught, and she fumbled forsaidar , but all the exercises sheriam and the others had taught
her, all the blossoms unfolding in her mind, all the imagined streams that she held like riverbanks, did no
good. she could feel it, sense the source, but she could not touch it.
elayne stepped from behind the tree in a wary crouch, and nynaeve sagged with relief. the
daughterheirs dress was dirty and torn, her golden hair was a tangle of snarls and leaves, and her
searching eyes were as wide as those of a frightened fawn, but she held her shortbladed dagger in a
steady hand. nynaeve picked up her reins and rode into the open.
elayne gave a convulsive jump, then her hand went to her throat and she drew a deep breath. nynaeve
dismounted, and the two women hugged, taking comfort in having found each other.
for a moment, elayne said as they finally stepped apart, i thought you were . . . do you know where
they are? there were two men following me. another few minutes and they would have caught me, but a
horn sounded and they turned their horses and galloped off. they could see me, nynaeve, and they just
left.
i heard it, too, and i havent seen any of them since. have you seen egwene, or min?
elayne shook her head, slumping to sit on the ground. not since . . . that man hit min, knocked her
down. and one of those women was trying to put something around egwenes neck. i saw that much
before i ran. i dont think they got away, nynaeve. i should have done something. min cut the hand that
was holding me, and egwene . . . i just ran, nynaeve. i realized i was free, and i ran. mother had better
marry gareth bryne and have another daughter as soon as she can. i am not fit to take the throne.
dont be a goose, nynaeve said sharply. remember, i have a packet of sheepstongue root among
my herbs. elayne had her head in her hands; the gibe did not even produce a murmur. listen to me,
girl. did you see me stay to fight twenty or thirty armed men, not to mention the aes sedai? if you had
waited, the most likely thing by far is that you would be a prisoner, too. if they didnt just kill you. they
seemed to be interested in egwene and me for some reason. they might not have cared whether you
remained alive or not.why arethey interested in egwene and me? why us in particular? why did
liandrin do this? why? she had no more answers now than she had had the first time she asked herself
these questions.
if i had died trying to help them   elayne began.



  youd be dead. and little good youd be then, to yourself or them. now get on your feet and brush
off your dress. nynaeve rummaged in her saddlebags for a hairbrush. and fix your hair.
elayne got up slowly, and took the brush with a small laugh. you sound like lini, my old nurse. she
began to run the brush through her hair, wincing as tangles pulled. but how are we going to help them,
nynaeve? you may be as strong as a full sister when you are angry, but they have women who can
channel, too. i cannot think theyre aes sedai, but they might as well be. we do not even know in which
direction they took them.
west, nynaeve said. that creature suroth mentioned falme, and thats as far west on toman head
as you can go. we will go to falme. i hope liandrin is there. i will make her curse the day her mother
laid eyes on her father. but first i think we had better find some clothes of the country. ive seen
taraboner and domani women in the tower, and what they wear is nothing like what we have on. we
would stand out in falme as strangers.
i would not mind a domani dress  though mother would surely have a fit if she ever found out id
worn one, and lini would never let me hear the end of it  but even if we find a village, can we afford
new dresses? i have no idea how much money you have, but i have only ten gold marks and perhaps
twice that in silver. that will keep us two or three weeks, but i dont know what we will do after that.
a few months as a novice in tar valon, nynaeve said, laughing, has not stopped you thinking like the
heir to a throne. i dont have a tenth what you do, but altogether it will keep us two or three months, in
comfort. longer, if we are careful. i have no intention of buying us dresses, and they wont be new in any
case. my gray silk dress will do us some good, with all those pearls and that gold thread. if i cant find a
woman who will trade us each two or three sturdy changes for that, i will give you this ring, and i will be
the novice. she swung up into her saddle and reached a hand down to pull elayne up behind her.
what are we going to do when we reach falme? elayne asked as she settled on the mares rump.
i wont know that until we are there. nynaeve paused, letting the horse stand. are you sure you want
to do this? it will be dangerous.
more dangerous than it is for egwene and min? they would come after us if our circumstances were
reversed; i know they would. are we going to stay here all day? elayne dug her heels in, and the mare
started off.
nynaeve turned the horse until the sun, still short of its noonday crest, shone at their backs. we are
going to have to be cautious. the aes sedai we know can recognize a woman who can channel just by
being within arms length of her. these aes sedai may be able to pick us out of a crowd if they are
looking for us, and we had better assume they are.they were certainly looking for egwene and me.
but why?
yes, cautious. you were right before, too. we will not do them any good letting ourselves be caught as
well. elayne was silent for a moment. do you think it was all lies, nynaeve? what liandrin told us
about rand being in danger? and the others? aes sedai do not lie.
it was nynaeves turn to be silent, remembering sheriam telling her of the oaths a woman took on being
raised to full sisterhood, oaths spoken inside aterangreal that bound her to keep them.to speak no
word that is not true . that was one, but everyone knew that the truth an aes sedai said might not be
the truth you thought you heard. i expect rand is warming his feet in front of lord agelmars fire in fal



dara this minute, she said.i cant worry about him, now. i have to think about egwene and min.
i suppose he is, elayne said with a sigh. she shifted behind the saddle. if it is very far to falme,
nynaeve, i expect to ride in the saddle half the time. this is not a very comfortable seat. we will never
reach falme at all if you let this horse set her own pace the whole way.
nynaeve booted the mare to a quick trot, and elayne yelped and caught at her cloak. nynaeve told
herself that she would take a turn riding behind and not complain if elayne put the horse to a gallop, but
for the most part she ignored the gasps of the woman bouncing behind her. she was too busy hoping that
by the time they reached falme, she could stop being afraid and start being angry.
the breeze freshened, cool and brisk with a hint of cold yet to come.

chapter 41

disagreements

thunder rumbled across the slatedark afternoon sky. rand pulled the hood of his cloak further up,
hoping to keep at least some of the cold rain off. red stepped through muddy puddles doggedly. the
hood hung sodden around rands head, as the rest of the cloak did around his shoulders, and his fine
black coat was just as wet, and as cold. the temperature would not have far to drop before snow or
sleet came down instead of rain. snow would fall soon, again; the people in the village they had passed
through said two snows had already come this year. shivering, rand almost wished it was snowing.
then, at least, he would not be soaked to the skin.
the column plodded along, keeping a wary eye on the rolling country. ingtars gray owl hung heavily
even when the wind gusted. hurin sometimes pulled his cowl back to sniff the air; he said neither rain nor
cold had any effect on a trail, certainly not on the kind of trail he was seeking, but so far the sniffer had
found nothing. behind him, rand heard uno mutter a curse. loial kept checking his saddlebags; he did
not seem to mind getting wet himself, but he worried continually about his books. everyone was
miserable except for verin, who appeared too lost in thought to even notice that her hood had slid back,
exposing her face to the rain.
cant you do something about this? rand demanded of her. a small voice in the back of his head told
him he could do it himself. all he need do was embracesaidin . so sweet, the call ofsaidin . to be filled
with the one power, to be one with the storm. turn the skies to sunlight, or ride the storm as it raged,
whip it to fury and scour toman head clean from the sea to the plain. embracesaidin . he suppressed
the longing ruthlessly.



the aes sedai gave a start. what? oh. i suppose. a little. i couldnt stop a storm this big, not by
myself  it covers too much area  but i could lessen it some. where we are, at least. she wiped rain
from her face, seemed to realize for the first time that her hood had slipped, and pulled it back up
absently.
then why dont you? mat said. the shivering face peering out from under his hood looked at deaths
door, but his voice was vigorous.
because if i used that much of the one power, any aes sedai closer than ten miles would know
someone had channeled. we dont want to bring these seanchan down on us with some of theirdamane
. her mouth tightened angrily.
they had learned a little of the invaders in that village, called atuans mill, though most of what they had
heard hatched more questions than it answered. the people had babbled one moment and clamped their
mouths shut the next, trembling and looking over their shoulders. they all shook with fear that the
seanchan would return with their monsters and theirdamane . that women who should have been aes
sedai were instead leashed like animals frightened the villagers even more than the strange creatures the
seanchan commanded, things the folk of atuans mill could only describe in whispers as coming from
nightmares. and worst of all, the examples the seanchan had made before leaving still chilled the people
to their marrow. they had buried their dead, but they feared to clean away the large charred patch in the
village square. none of them would say what had happened there, but hurin had vomited as soon as they
entered the village, and he would not go near the blackened ground.
atuans mill had been half deserted. some had fled to falme, thinking the seanchan would not be so
harsh in a town they held fast, and others had gone east. more had said they were thinking of it. there
was fighting on almoth plain, taraboners battling domani it was said, but such houses and barns as were
burned there were kindled by torches in the hands of men. even a war was easier to face than what the
seanchan had done, what they might do.
why did fain bring the horn here? perrin muttered. the question had been asked by each of them at
one time or another, and no one had an answer. theres war, and these seanchan, and their monsters.
why here?
ingtar turned in his saddle to look back at them. his face appeared almost as haggard as mats. there
are always men who see chances for their own advantage in the confusion of war. fain is one like that.
no doubt he thinks to steal the horn again, from the dark one this time, and use it for his own profit.
the father of lies never lays simple plans, verin said. it may be that he wants fain to bring the horn
here for some reason known only in shayol ghul.
monsters, mat snorted. his cheeks were sunken, now, his eyes hollow. that hesounded healthy only
made it worse. they saw some trollocs, or a fade, if you ask me. well, why not? if the seanchan have
aes sedai fighting for them, why not fades and trollocs? he caught verin staring at him and flinched.
well, they are, on leashes or not. they can channel, and that makes them aes sedai.  he glanced at
rand and gave a ragged laugh. that makes you aes sedai, the light help us all.
masema came galloping from ahead, through the mud and the steady rain. there is another village
ahead, my lord, he said as he pulled in beside ingtar. his eyes only swept past rand, but they
tightened, and he did not look at rand again. its empty, my lord. no villagers, no seanchan, nobody
at all. the houses all look sound, though, except for two or three that . . . well, they arent there anymore,
my lord.



ingtar raised his hand and signaled for a trot.
the village masema had found covered the slopes of a hill, with a paved square at the top around a
circle of stone walls. the houses were of stone, all flatroofed and few more than a single story. three
that had been larger, along one side of the square, were only heaps of blackened rubble; shattered
chunks of stone and roof beams lay scattered across the square. a few shutters banged when the wind
gusted.
ingtar dismounted in front of the only large building still standing. the creaking sign above its door bore a
woman juggling stars, but no name; rain came off the corners in two steady drizzles. verin hurried inside
while ingtar spoke. uno, search every house. if there is anyone left, perhaps they can tell us what
happened here, and maybe a little more about these seanchan. and if theres any food, bring that, too.
and blankets. uno nodded and began telling off men. ingtar turned to hurin. what do you smell? did
fain come through here?
hurin, rubbing his nose, shook his head. not him, my lord, and not the trollocs, neither. whoever did
that left a stench, though. he pointed to the wreckage that had been houses. it was killing, my lord.
there were people in there.
seanchan, ingtar growled. lets get inside. ragan, find some sort of stable for the horses.
verin already had fires going in both of the big fireplaces, at either end of the common room, and was
warming her hands at one, her sodden cloak spread out on one of the tables dotting the tiled floor. she
had found a few candles, too, now burning on a table stuck in their own tallow. emptiness and quiet,
except for the occasional grumble of thunder, added to the flickering shadows to give the place a
cavernous feel. rand tossed his equally wet cloak and coat on a table and joined her. only loial seemed
more interested in checking his books than in warming himself.
we will never find the horn of valere this way, ingtar said. three days since we . . . since we arrived
here  he shuddered and scrubbed a hand through his hair; rand wondered what the shienaran had
seen in his other lives  another two, at least, to falme, and we have not found so much as a hair of
fain or darkfriends. there are scores of villages along the coast. he could have gone to any of them and
taken ship anywhere by now. if he was ever here.
he is here, verin said calmly, and he went to falme.
and hes still here, rand said.waiting for me. please, light, hes still waiting.
hurin still hasnt caught a whiff of him, ingtar said. the sniffer shrugged as if he felt himself at fault for
the failure. why would he choose falme? if those villagers are to be believed, falme is held by these
seanchan. i would give my best hound to know who they are, and where they came from.
who they are is not important to us. verin knelt and unfastened her saddlebags, pulling out dry
clothes. at least we have rooms in which to change our clothes, though it will do us little good unless the
weather changes. ingtar, it may well be that what the villagers told us is right, that they are the
descendants of artur hawkwings armies come back. what matters is that padan fain has gone to
falme. the writings in the dungeon at fal dara  
  never mentioned fain. forgive me, aes sedai, but that could have been a trick as easily as dark
prophecy. i cant believe even trollocs would be stupid enough to tell us everything they were going to



do before they did it.
she twisted to look up at him. and what do you mean to do, if you will not take my advice?
i mean to have the horn of valere, ingtar said firmly. forgive me, but i have to trust my own senses
before some words scrawled by a trolloc . . .
a myrddraal, surely, verin murmured, but he did not even pause.
 . . . or a darkfriend seeming to betray himself out of his own mouth. i mean to quarter the ground until
hurin smells a trail or we find fain in the flesh. i must have the horn, verin sedai. i must!
that isnt the way, hurin said softly. not must. what happens, happens. no one paid him any
mind.
we all must, verin murmured, peering into her saddlebags, yet some things may be even more
important than that.
she did not say more, but rand grimaced. he longed to get away from her and her prods and hints.i am
not the dragon reborn. light, but i wish i could just get away from aes sedai completely . ingtar,
i think im riding on to falme. fain is there  im sure he is  and if i dont come soon, he  he will
do something to hurt emonds field. he had not mentioned that part before.
they all stared at him, mat and perrin frowning, worried but considering; verin as if she had just seen a
new piece added to a puzzle. loial looked astonished, and hurin seemed confused. ingtar was openly
disbelieving.
why would he do that? the shienaran said.
i dont know, rand lied, but that was part of the message he left with barthanes.
and did barthanes say fain was going to falme? ingtar demanded. no. it wouldnt matter if he
had. he gave a bitter laugh. darkfriends lie as naturally as they breathe.
rand, mat said, if i knew how to stop fain from hurting emonds field, i would. if i was sure he
was going to. but i need that dagger, rand, and hurin has the best chance of finding it.
i will go wherever you go, rand, loial said. he had finished making sure the books were dry and was
taking off his sodden coat. but i dont see where a few more days will change anything one way or
another, now. try being a little less hasty for once.
it doesnt matter to me whether we go to falme now, later, or never, perrin said with a shrug, but if
fain really is threatening emonds field . . . well, mats right. hurin is the best way to find him.
i can find him, lord rand, hurin put in. let me get one sniff of him, and ill take you right to him.
theres never anything else left a trail like his.
you must make your own choice, rand, verin said carefully, but remember that falme is held by
invaders about whom we still know next to nothing. if you go to falme alone, you may find yourself a
prisoner, or worse, and that will serve nothing. i am sure whatever choice you make will be the right
one.



taveren, loial rumbled.
rand threw up his hands.
uno came in from the square, shaking rain off his cloak. not a flaming soul to be found, my lord.
looks to me like they ran like striped pigs. livestocks all gone, and there isnt a bloody cart or wagon
left, either. half the houses are stripped to the flaming floors. ill wager my next months pay you could
follow them by the bloody furniture they tossed on the side of the road when they realized it was only
weighing down their flaming wagons.
what about clothes? ingtar asked.
uno blinked his one eye in surprise. just a few bits and pieces, my lord. mainly what they didnt think
was bloody worth taking with them.
they will have to do. hurin, i mean to dress you and a few more as local people, as many as we can
manage, so you wont stand out. i want you to swing wide, north and south, until you cross the trail.
more soldiers were coming in, and they all gathered around ingtar and hurin to listen.
rand leaned his hands on the mantel over the fireplace and stared into the flames. they made him think
of baalzamons eyes. there isnt much time, he said. i feel . . . something . . . pulling me to falme,
and there isnt much time. he saw verin watching him, and added harshly, not that. its fain i have to
find. it has nothing to do with . . . that.
verin nodded. the wheel weaves as the wheel wills, and we are all woven into the pattern. fain has
been here weeks before us, perhaps months. a few more days will make little difference in whatever is
going to happen.
im going to get some sleep, he muttered, picking up his saddlebags. they cant have carried off all
the beds.
upstairs, he did find beds, but only a few still had mattresses, and those so lumpy he thought it might be
more comfortable to sleep on the floor. finally he chose a bed where the mattress simply sagged in the
middle. there was nothing else in the room except one wooden chair and a table with a rickety leg.
he took off his wet things, putting on a dry shirt and breeches before lying down, since there were no
sheets or blankets, and propped his sword beside the head of the bed. wryly, he thought that the only
thing dry he had for a coverlet was the dragons banner; he left it safely buckled inside the saddlebags.
rain drummed on the roof, and thunder growled overhead, and now and again a lightning flash lit the
windows. shivering, he rolled this way and that on the mattress, seeking some comfortable way to lie,
wondering if the banner would not do for a blanket after all, wondering if he should ride on to falme.
he rolled to his other side, and baalzamon was standing beside the chair with the pure white length of
the dragons banner in his hands. the room seemed darker there, as if baalzamon stood on the edge of
a cloud of oily black smoke. nearly healed burns crisscrossed his face, and as rand looked, his
pitchdark eyes vanished for an instant, replaced by endless caverns of fire. rands saddlebags lay by his
feet, buckles undone, flap thrown back where the banner had been hidden.
the time comes closer, lews therin. a thousand threads draw tight, and soon you will be tied and



trapped, set to a course you cannot change. madness. death. before you die, will you once more kill
everything you love?
rand glanced at the door, but he made no move except to sit up on the side of the bed. what good to
try running from the dark one? his throat felt like sand. i am not the dragon, father of lies! he said
hoarsely.
the darkness behind baalzamon roiled, and furnaces roared as baalzamon laughed. you honor me.
and belittle yourself. i know you too well. i have faced you a thousand times. a thousand times a
thousand. i know you to your miserable soul, lews therin kinslayer. he laughed again; rand put a
hand in front of his face against the heat of that fiery mouth.
what do you want? i will not serve you. i will not do anything that you want. ill die first!
youwill die, worm! how many times have you died across the span of the ages, fool, and how much
has death availed you? the grave is cold and lonely, save for the worms. the grave is mine. this time
there will be no rebirth for you. this time the wheel of time will be broken and the world remade in the
image of the shadow. this time your death will be forever! which will you choose? death everlasting?
or life eternal  and power!
rand hardly realized that he was on his feet. the void had surrounded him,saidin was there, and the
one power flowed into him. that fact almost cracked the emptiness. was this real? was it a dream?
could he channel in a dream? but the torrent rushing into him swept away his doubts. he hurled it at
baalzamon, hurled the pure one power, the force that turned the wheel of time, a force that could
make seas burn and eat mountains.
baalzamon took half a step back, holding the banner clutched before him. flames leaped in his wide
eyes and mouth, and the darkness seemed to cloak him in shadow. in the shadow. the power sank into
that black mist and vanished, soaked up like water on parched sand.
rand drew onsaidin , pulled for more, and still more. his flesh seemed so cold it must shatter at a touch;
it burned as if it must boil away. his bones felt on the point of crisping to cold crystal ash. he did not
care; it was like drinking life itself.
fool! baalzamon roared. you will destroy yourself!
mat. the thought floated somewhere beyond the consuming flood.the dagger. the horn. fain.
emonds field. i cant die yet.
he was not sure how he did it, but suddenly the power was gone, andsaidin , and the void. shuddering
uncontrollably, he fell to his knees beside the bed, arms wrapped around himself in a vain effort to stop
their twitching.
that is better, lews therin. baalzamon tossed the banner to the floor and put his hands on the chair
back; wisps of smoke rose from between his fingers. the shadow no longer encompassed him. there is
your banner, kinslayer. much good will it do you. a thousand strings laid over a thousand years have
drawn you here. ten thousand woven throughout the ages tie you like a sheep for slaughter. the wheel
itself holds you prisoner to your fate age after age. but i can set you free. you cowering cur, i alone in
the entire world can teach you how to wield the power. i alone can stop it killing you before you have a
chance to go mad. i alone can stop the madness. you have served me before. serve me again, lews
therin, or be destroyed forever!



my name, rand forced between chattering teeth, is rand althor. his shivering forced him to
squeeze his eyes shut, and when he opened them again, he was alone.
baalzamon was gone. the shadow was gone. his saddlebags stood against the chair with the buckles
done up and one side bulging with the bulk of the dragons banner, just as he had left it. but on the chair
back, tendrils of smoke still rose from the charred impressions of fingers.

chapter 42

falme

nynaeve pressed elayne back into the narrow alleyway between a cloth merchants shop and a potters
works as the pair of women linked by a silvery leash passed by, heading down the cobblestone street
toward falme harbor. they did not dare allow that pair to come too close. the people in the street made
way for those two even more quickly than they did for seanchan soldiers, or the occasional nobles
palanquin, thickly curtained now that the days were cold. even the street artists did not offer to draw
them in chalks or pencils, although they pestered everyone else. nynaeves mouth tightened as her eyes
followed thesuldam and thedamane through the crowd. even after weeks in the town, the sight
sickened her. perhaps it sickened her more, now. she could not imagine doing that to any woman, not
even moiraine or liandrin.
well, maybe liandrin, she admitted sourly. sometimes, at night, in the small, smelly room the two of
them had rented above a fishmonger, she thought of what she would like to do to liandrin when she got
her hands on her. liandrin even more than suroth. more than once she had been shocked at her own
cruelty, even while she was delighted at her inventiveness.
still trying to keep the pair in sight, her eyes fell on a bony man, well down the street, before the shifting
throng hid him again. she had only a flash of a big nose in a narrow face. he wore a rich bronze velvet
robe of seanchan cut over his clothes, but she thought that he was no seanchan, though the servant
following him was, and a servant of high degree, with one temple shaved. the local people had not taken
to seanchan fashions, particularly that one.that looked like padan fain , she thought incredulously.it
couldnt be. not here.
nynaeve, elayne said softly, could we move on, now? that fellow selling apples is looking at his table
as if hes thinking he had more a few moments ago, and i would not want him wondering what i have in
my pockets.
they both wore long coats made of sheepskin, with the fleece turned in and bright red spirals



embroidered across the breast. it was country garb, but it passed well enough in falme, where many
people had come in from the farms and villages. among so many strangers the two of them had been
able to sink in unnoticed. nynaeve had combed out her braid, and her gold ring, the serpent eating its
own tail, now nestled under her dress beside lans heavy ring on the leather cord around her neck.
the large pockets of elaynes coat bulged suspiciously.
you stole those apples? nynaeve hissed quietly, pulling elayne out into the crowded street. elayne,
we dont have to steal. not yet, anyway.
no? how much money do we have left? you have been not hungry very often at mealtimes the last
few days.
well, i am not hungry, nynaeve snapped, trying to ignore the hollow in her middle. everything cost
considerably more than she had expected; she had heard local people complaining about how prices had
risen since the seanchan came. give me one of those. the apple elayne dug out of her pocket was
small and hard, but it crunched with a delicious sweetness when nynaeve bit into it. she licked the juice
from her lips. how did you manage to   she jerked elayne to a halt and peered into her face. did
you . . . ? did you . . . ? she could not think of a way to say it with so many streaming by, but elayne
understood.
only a little. i made that stack of old melons with the soft spots fall, and when he started putting them
back . . . she did not even have the grace, as nynaeve saw it, to blush or look embarrassed.
unconcernedly eating one of the apples, she shrugged. there is no need to frown at me like that. i
looked carefully to make sure there was nodamane close. she sniffed. if i were being held prisoner, i
would not help my captors find other women to enslave. although, the way these falmen behave, you
would think they were lifelong servants of those who should be their enemies to the death. she looked
around, openly contemptuous, at the people hurrying by; it was possible to follow the path of any
seanchan, even common soldiers and even at a distance, by the ripples of bowing. they should resist.
they should fight back.
how? against . . . that.
they had to step to the side of the street along with everyone else as a seanchan patrol neared, climbing
from the direction of the harbor. nynaeve managed the bow, hands on knees, with face schooled to a
perfect smoothness; elayne was slower, and made her bow with a distasteful twist of her mouth.
there were twenty armored men and women in the patrol, riding horses, for which nynaeve was
grateful. she could not become used to seeing people riding things that looked like bronzescaled, tailless
cats, and a rider on one of the flying beasts was always enough to make her feel dizzy; she was glad there
were so few of them. still, two leashed creatures trotted along with the patrol, like wingless birds with
coarse leather skin, and sharp beaks higher above the cobblestones than the helmeted heads of the
soldier. their long, sinewy legs looked as if they could run faster than any horse.
she straightened slowly after the seanchan were gone. some of those who had bowed for the patrol
came close to running; no one was comfortable at the sight of the seanchans beasts except the
seanchan themselves. elayne, she said softly as they resumed their climb, if we are caught, i swear
that before they kill us, or do whatever they do, i will beg them on bended knees to let me stripe you
from top to bottom with the stoutest switch i can find! if you still cant learn to be careful, maybe its time
to think about sending you back to tar valon, or home to caemlyn, or anywhere but here.



i am careful. at least i looked to be sure there was nodamane close by. what about you? i have seen
you channel with one in plain sight.
i made sure they werent looking at me, nynaeve muttered. she had had to ball up all her anger at
women being chained like animals to manage it. and i only did it once. and it was only a trickle.
a trickle? we had to spend three days hiding in our room breathing fish while they searched the town
for whoever had done it. do you call that being careful?
i had to know if there was a way to unfasten those collars. she thought there was. she would have to
test one more collar at least before she was certain, and she was not looking forward to it. she had
thought, like elayne, that thedamane must all be prisoners eager to escape, but it had been the woman in
the collar who raised the cry.
a man pushing a barrow that bumped over the cobblestones passed by them, crying his services to
sharpen scissors and knives. they should resist, somehow, elayne growled. they act as if they do not
see anything that happens around them if theres a seanchan in it.
nynaeve only sighed. it did not help that she thought elayne was at least partly right. at first she had
thought some of the falmen submission, at least, must be a pose, but she had found no evidence of any
resistance at all. she had looked at first, hoping to find help in freeing egwene and min, but everyone
took fright at the merest hint that they might oppose the seanchan, and she stopped asking before she
drew the wrong sort of attention. in truth, she could not imagine how the people could fight.monsters
and aes sedai. how can you fight monsters and aes sedai?
ahead stood five tall stone houses, among the largest in the town, all together making up a block. one
street short of them, nynaeve found an alleyway beside a tailor shop, where they could keep an eye on
some of the tall houses entrances, at least. it was not possible to see every door at once  she did not
want to risk letting elayne go off on her own to watch more  but it was not wise to go any closer.
above the rooftops, on the next street, the golden hawk banner of the high lord turak flapped in the
wind.
only women went in or out of those houses, and most of those weresuldam , alone or withdamane in
tow. the buildings had been taken over by the seanchan to house thedamane . egwene had to be in
there, and likely min; they had found no sign of min so far, though it was possible she was as hidden by
the crowds as they. nynaeve had heard many tales of women and girls being seized on the streets or
brought in from the villages; they all went into those houses, and if they were seen again, they wore a
collar.
settling herself on a crate beside elayne, she dug into the other womans coat for a handful of the small
apples. there were fewer local folk in the streets here. everyone knew what the houses were, and
everyone avoided them, just as they avoided the stables where the seanchan kept their beasts. it was not
difficult to keep an eye on the doors through spaces between the passersby. just two women stopping
for a bite; just two more people who could not afford to eat at an inn. nothing to attract more than a
passing glance.
eating mechanically, nynaeve tried once more to plan. being able to open the collar  if she really
could  did no good at all unless she could reach egwene. the apples did not taste so sweet anymore.
from the narrow window of her tiny room under the eaves, one of a number roughly walled together
from whatever had been there before, egwene could see the garden wheredamane were being walked



by theirsuldam . it had been several gardens before the seanchan knocked down the walls that
separated them and took the big houses to keep theirdamane . the trees were all but leafless, but the
damane were still taken out for air, whether they wanted it or not. egwene watched the garden because
renna was down there, talking with anothersuldam , and as long as she could see renna, then renna
was not going to enter and surprise her.
some othersuldam might come  there were many moresuldam thandamane , and everysuldam
wanted her turn wearing a bracelet; they called it being complete  but renna still had charge of her
training, and it was renna who wore her bracelet four times out of five. if anyone came, they would find
no impediment to entering. there were no locks on the doors ofdamane s rooms. egwenes room held
only a hard, narrow bed, a washstand with a chipped pitcher and bowl, one chair and a small table, but it
had no room for more.damane had no need of comfort, or privacy, or possessions.damane were
possessions. min had a room just like this, in another house, but min could come and go as she would,
or almost as she would. seanchan were great ones for rules; they had more, for everyone, than the white
tower did for novices.
egwene stood far back from the window. she did not want any of the women below to look up and see
the glow that she knew surrounded her as she channeled the one power, probing delicately at the collar
around her neck, searching futilely; she could not even tell whether the band was woven or made of links
 sometimes it seemed one, sometimes the other  but it seemed all of a piece all the time. it was only
a tiny trickle of the power, the merest drip that she could imagine, but it still beaded sweat on her face
and made her stomach clench. that was one of the properties of theadam ; if adamane tried to channel
without asuldam wearing her bracelet, she felt sick, and the more of the power she channeled, the
sicker she became. lighting a candle beyond the reach of her arm would have made egwene vomit.
once renna had ordered her to juggle her tiny balls of light with the bracelet lying on the table.
remembering still made her shudder.
now, the silver leash snaked across the bare floor and up the unpainted wooden wall to where the
bracelet hung on a peg. the sight of it hanging there made her jaws clench with fury. a dog leashed so
carelessly could have run away. if adamane moved her bracelet as much as a foot from where it had last
been touched by asuldam . . . renna had made her do that, too  had made her carry her own
bracelet across the room. or try to. she was sure it had only been minutes before thesuldam snapped
the bracelet firmly on her own wrist, but to egwene the screaming and the cramps that had had her
writhing on the floor had seemed to go on for hours.
someone tapped at the door, and egwene jumped, before she realized it could not be asuldam . none
of them would knock first. she letsaidar go, anyway; she was beginning to feel decidedly ill. min?
here i am for my weekly visit, min announced as she slipped inside and shut the door. her cheeriness
sounded a little forced, but she always did what she could to keep egwenes spirits up. how do you
like it? she spun in a little circle, showing off her dark green wool dress of seanchan cut. a heavy,
matching cloak hung over her arm. there was even a green ribbon catching up her dark hair, though her
hair was hardly long enough for it. her knife was still in its sheath at her waist, though. egwene had been
surprised when min first showed up wearing it, but it seemed the seanchan trusted everyone. until they
broke a rule.
its pretty, egwene said cautiously. but, why?
i havent gone over to the enemy, if that is what you are thinking. it was this, or else find someplace to
stay out in the town, and maybe not be able to visit you again. she started to straddle the chair as she
would have in breeches, gave a wry shake of her head, and turned it around to sit. everyone has a



place in the pattern, she mimicked, and the place of everyone must be readily apparent. that old hag
mulaen apparently got tired of not knowing what my place was on sight and decided i ranked with the
serving girls. she gave me the choice. you should see some of the things seanchan serving girls wear, the
ones who serve the lords. it might be fun, but not unless i was betrothed, or, better yet, married. well,
theres no going back. not yet, anyway. mulaen burned my coat and breeches. grimacing to show
what she thought of that, she picked up a rock from a small pile on the table and bounced it from hand to
hand. it isnt so bad, she said with a laugh, except that it has been so long since i wore skirts that i
keep tripping over them.
egwene had had to watch her clothes being burned, too, including that lovely green silk. it had made her
glad she had not brought more of the clothes the lady amalisa had given her, though she might never see
any of them, or the white tower, again. what she had on now was the same dark gray alldamane wore.
damanehave no possessions , it had been explained to her.the dress adamanewears, the food she
eats, the bed she sleeps in, are all gifts from her suldam. if asuldamchooses that a damanesleep on
the floor instead of in a bed, or in a stall in a stable, it is purely the choice of the suldam. mulaen,
who had charge of thedamane quarters, had a droning nasal voice, but she was sharp with anydamane
who did not remember every word of her boring lectures.
i dont think there will be any going back for me ever, egwene said, sighing, sinking down on her bed.
she gestured to the rocks on the table. renna gave me a test, yesterday. i picked out the piece of iron
ore, and the copper ore, blindfolded, every time she mixed them up. she left them all here to remind me
of my success. she seemed to think it was some kind of reward to be reminded.
it doesnt seem any worse than the rest  not nearly as bad as making things explode like fireworks
 but couldnt you have lied? told her you didnt know which was which?
you still do not know what this is like. egwene tugged at the collar; pulling did no more good than
channeling had. when renna is wearing that bracelet, she knows what i am doing with the power, and
what i am not. sometimes she even seems to know when she isnt wearing it; she sayssuldam develop
 an affinity, she calls it  after a while. she sighed. no one even thought to test me on this earlier.
earth is one of the five powers that was strongest in men. when i picked out those rocks, she took me
outside the town, and i was able to point right to an abandoned iron mine. it was all overgrown, and
there wasnt any opening to be seen at all, but once i knew how, i could feel the iron ore still in the
ground. there hasnt been enough to make it worth working in a hundred years, but i knew it was there.
i couldnt lie to her, min. she knew i had sensed the mine as soon as i did. she was so excited, she
promised me a pudding with my supper. she felt her cheeks growing hot, in anger and embarrassment.
apparently, she said bitterly, i am now too valuable to be wasted making things explode. anydamane
can do that; only a handful can find ores in the ground. light, i hate making things explode, but i wish that
was all i could do.
the color in her cheeks deepened. she did hate it, making trees tear themselves to splinters and the
earth erupt; that was meant for battle, for killing, and she wanted no part of it. yet anything the seanchan
let her do was another chance to touchsaidar , to feel the power flowing through her. she hated the
things renna and the othersuldam made her do, but she was sure that she could handle much more of
the power now than she could before leaving tar valon. she certainly knew she could do things with it
that no sister in the tower had ever thought of doing; they never thought of tearing the earth apart to kill
men.
perhaps you wont have to worry about any of it much longer, min said, grinning. ive found us a
ship, egwene. the captain has been held here by the seanchan, and he is about ready to sail with or
without permission.



if he will take you, min, go with him, egwene said wearily. i told you im valuable, now. renna says
in a few days theyre sending a ship back to seanchan. just to take me.
mins grin vanished, and they stared at each other. suddenly min hurled her rock at the pile on the table,
scattering them. there has to be a way out of here. there has to be a way to take that bloody thing off
your neck!
egwene leaned her head back against the wall. you know the seanchan have collected every woman
theyve been able to find who can channel even a speck. they come from all over, not just from here in
falme, but from the fishing villages, and from farming towns inland. taraboner and domani women,
passengers off ships theyve stopped. there are two aes sedai among them.
aes sedai! min exclaimed. by habit she looked around to make sure no seanchan had overheard her
saying that name. egwene, if there are aes sedai here, they can help us. let me talk to them, and  
they cant even help themselves, min. i only talked to one  her name is ryma; thesuldam dont call
her that, but thats her name; she wanted to make sure i knew it  and she told me there is another. she
told me in between bouts of tears. shes aes sedai, and she was crying, min! she has a collar on her
neck, they make her answer to pura, and she cant do anything more about it than i can. they captured
her when falme fell. she was crying because shes beginning to stop fighting against it, because she
cannot take being punished anymore. she was crying because she wants to take her own life, and she
cannot even do that without permission. light, i know how she feels!
min shifted uneasily, smoothing her dress with suddenly nervous hands. egwene, you dont want to . . .
egwene, you must not think of harming yourself. i will get you out somehow. i will!
i am not going to kill myself, egwene said dryly. even if i could. let me have your knife. come on. i
wont hurt myself. just hand it to me.
min hesitated before slowly taking her knife from its sheath at her waist. she held it out warily, obviously
ready to leap if egwene tried anything.
egwene took a deep breath and reached for the hilt. a soft quiver ran through the muscles of her arm.
as her hand came within a foot of the knife, a cramp suddenly contorted her fingers. eyes fixed, she tried
to force her hand closer. the cramp seized her whole arm, knotting muscles to her shoulder. with a
groan, she sank back, rubbing her arm and concentrating her thoughts onnot touching the knife. slowly,
the pain began to lessen.
min stared at her incredulously. what . . .? i dont understand.
damaneare not allowed to touch a weapon of any kind. she worked her arm, feeling the tightness go.
even our meat is cut for us. i dont want to hurt myself, but i could not if i did want to. nodamane is
ever left alone where she might jump from a height  that window is nailed shut  or throw herself in a
river.
well, thats a good thing. i mean . . . oh, i dont know what i mean. if you could jump in a river, you
might escape.
egwene went on dully, as if the other woman had not spoken. they are training me, min. thesuldam
and theadam are training me. i cannot touch anything i even think of as a weapon. a few weeks ago i



considered hitting renna over the head with that pitcher, and i could not pour wash water for three days.
once id thought of it that way, i not only had to stop thinking about hitting her with it, i had to convince
myself i would never, under any circumstances, hit her with it before i could touch it again. she knew
what had happened, told me what i had to do, and would not let me wash anywhere except with that
pitcher and bowl. you are lucky it happened between your visiting days. renna made sure i spent those
days sweating from the time i woke to the time i fell asleep, exhausted. i am trying to fight them, but they
are training me as surely as theyre training pura. she clapped a hand to her mouth, moaning through her
teeth. her name is ryma. i have to rememberher name, not the name theyve put on her. she is ryma,
and shes yellow ajah, and she has fought them as long and as hard as she could. it is no fault of hers
that she hasnt the strength left to fight any longer. i wish i knew who the other sister is that ryma
mentioned. i wish i knew her name. remember both of us, min. ryma, of the yellow ajah, and egwene
alvere. not egwene thedamane ; egwene alvere of emonds field. will you do that?
stop it! min snapped. you stop it right this instant! if you get shipped off to seanchan, ill be right
there with you. but i dont think you will. you know ive read you, egwene. i dont understand most of
it  i almost never do  but i see things i am sure link you to rand, and perrin, and mat, and  yes,
even galad, the light help you for a fool. how can any of that happen if the seanchan take you off
across the ocean?
maybe theyre going to conquer the whole world, min. if they conquer the world, theres no reason
rand and galad and the rest could not end up in seanchan.
you ninnyheaded goose!
i am being practical, egwene said sharply. i dont intend to stop fighting, not as long as i can breathe,
but i dont see any hope that ill ever have theadam off me, either. just as i dont see any hope that
anyone is going to stop the seanchan. min, if this ship captain will take you, go with him. at least then
one of us will be free.
the door swung open, and renna stepped in.
egwene jumped to her feet and bowed sharply, as did min. the tiny room was crowded for bowing, but
seanchan insisted on protocol before comfort.
your visiting day, is it? renna said. i had forgotten. well, there is training to be done even on visiting
days.
egwene watched sharply as thesuldam took down the bracelet, opened it, and fastened it again around
her wrist. she could not see how it was done. if she could have probed with the one power, she would
have, but renna would have known that immediately. as the bracelet closed around rennas wrist a
look came onto thesuldam s face that made egwenes heart sink.
you have been channeling. rennas voice was deceptively mild; there was a spark of anger in her
eyes. you know that is forbidden except when we are complete. egwene wet her lips. perhaps i have
been too lenient with you. perhaps you believe that because you are valuable now, you will be allowed
license. i think i made a mistake letting you keep your old name. i had a kitten called tuli when i was a
child. from now on, your name is tuli. you will go now, min. your visiting day with tuli is ended.
min hesitated only long enough for one anguished look at egwene before leaving. nothing min could say
or do would do anything except make matters worse, but egwene could not help looking longingly at the
door as it closed behind her friend.



renna took the chair, frowning at egwene. i must punish you severely for this. we will both be called
to the court of the nine moons  you for what you can do; i as yoursuldam and trainer  and i will
not allow you to disgrace me in the eyes of the empress. i will stop when you tell me how much you love
beingdamane and how obedient you will be after this. and, tuli. make me believe every word.

chapter 43

a plan

outside in the lowceilinged hallway, min dug her nails into her palms at the first piercing cry from the
room. she took a step toward the door before she could stop herself, and when she did stop, tears
sprang up in her eyes.light help me, all i can do it make it worse. egwene, im sorry. im sorry.
feeling worse than useless, she picked up her skirts and ran, and egwenes screams pursued her. she
could not make herself stay, and leaving made her feel a coward. half blind with weeping, she found
herself in the street before she knew it. she had intended to go back to her room, but now she could not
do it. she could not stand the thought that egwene was being hurt while she sat warm and safe under the
next roof. scrubbing the tears from her eyes, she swept her cloak around her shoulders and started down
the street. every time she cleared her eyes, new tears began trickling along her cheeks. she was not
accustomed to weeping openly, but then she was not accustomed to feeling so helpless, so useless. she
did not know where she was going, only that it had to be as far as she could reach from egwenes cries.
min!
the lowpitched shout brought her up short. at first, she could not make out who had called. relatively
few people walked the street this close to where thedamane were housed. aside from a lone man trying
to interest two seanchan soldiers in buying the picture he would draw of them with his colored chalks,
everyone local tried to step along quickly without actually appearing to run. a pair ofsuldam strolled by,
damane trailing behind with eyes down; the seanchan women were talking about how many more
marathdamane they expected to find before they sailed. mins eyes passed right over the two women
in long fleece coats, then swung back in wonder as they came toward her. nynaeve? elayne?
none other. nynaeves smile was strained; both women had tight eyes, as if they fought worried
frowns. min thought she had never seen anything as wonderful as the sight of them. that color becomes
you, nynaeve continued. you should have taken up dresses long since. though ive thought of
breeches myself since i saw them on you. her voice sharpened as she drew close enough to see mins
face. what is the matter?



youve been crying, elayne said. has something happened to egwene?
min gave a start and looked back over her shoulder. asuldam anddamane came down the steps she
had used and turned the other way, toward the stables and horse yards. another woman with the
lightning panels on her dress stood at the top of the stairs talking with someone still inside. min grabbed
her friends by the arms and hurried them down the street toward the harbor. its dangerous for you two
here. light, its dangerous for you to be in falme. there aredamane everywhere, and if they find you . . .
you do know whatdamane are? oh, you dont know how good it is to see you both.
i imagine about as half as good as it is to see you, nynaeve said. do you know where egwene is? is
she in one of those buildings? is she all right?
min hesitated a fraction before saying, shes as well as can be expected. min could see it all too well,
if she told them what was happening to egwene right that moment. nynaeve was as likely as not to go
storming back in an attempt to stop it.light, let it be over by now. light, make her bend her stubborn
neck just once before they almost break it first . i dont know how to get her out, though. i found a
ship captain who i think will take us if we can reach his ship with her  he wont help unless we make it
that far, and i cannot say i blame him  but i have no idea how to do even that much.
a ship, nynaeve said thoughtfully. i had meant to simply ride east, but i must say ive worried about
it. as nearly as i can make out, we would have to be almost off toman head before we were clear of
seanchan patrols completely, and then theres supposed to be fighting of some sort on almoth plain. i
never thought of a ship. we have horses, and we do not have money for passage. how much does this
man want?
min shrugged. i never got that far. we dont have any money, either. i thought i could put off paying
until after we sail. afterwards . . . well, i dont think hell put into any port where there are seanchan.
wherever he threw us off, it would have to be better than here. the problem is convincing him to sail at
all. he wants to, but they patrol off the harbor, too, and there is no way of telling if theres adamane on
one of their ships until its too late. give me adamane of my own on my deck, he says, and i will sail
this instant. then he starts talking about drafts and shoals and lee shores. i dont understand any of that,
but as long as i smile and nod every now and then, he keeps talking, and i think if i can keep him talking
long enough, hell talk himself into sailing. she drew a shuddering breath; her eyes started stinging again.
only, i dont think theres time to let him talk himself into it anymore. nynaeve, theyre going to send
egwene back to seanchan, and soon.
elayne gasped. but, why?
she is able to find ore, min said miserably. a few days, she says, and i dont know if a few days is
enough for this man to convince himself to sail. even if it is, how do we take that shadowspawned collar
off her? how do we get her out of the house?
i wish rand were here. elayne sighed, and when they both looked at her, she blushed and quickly
added, well, he does have a sword. i wish we had somebody with a sword. ten of them. a hundred.
it isnt swords or brawn we need now, nynaeve said, but brains. men usually think with the hair on
their chests. she touched her chest absently, as if feeling something through her coat. most of them
do.
we would need an army, min said. a large army. the seanchan were outnumbered when they faced
the taraboners, and the domani, and they won every battle easily, from what i hear. she hurriedly



pulled nynaeve and elayne to the opposite side of the street as adamane andsuldam climbed past them
on the other side. she was relieved there was no need for urging; the other two watched the linked
women go as warily as she. since we dont have an army, the three of us will have to do it. i hope one
of you can think of something i havent; ive wracked my brains, and i always stumble when it comes to
theadam , the leash and collar.suldam dont like anyone watching too closely when they open them. i
think i can get you inside, if that will help. one of you, anyway. they think of me as a servant, but
servants may have visitors, as long as they keep to the servants quarters.
nynaeve wore a thoughtful frown, but her face cleared almost immediately, taking on a purposeful look.
dont you worry, min. i have a few ideas. i have not spent my time here idly. you take me to this man.
if he is any harder to handle than the village council with their backs up, i will eat this coat.
elayne nodded, grinning, and min felt the first real hope she had had since arriving in falme. for an
instant min found herself reading the auras of the other two women. there was danger, but that was to
be expected  and new things, too, among the images she had seen before; it was like that, sometimes.
a mans ring of heavy gold floated above nynaeves head, and above elaynes, a redhot iron and an
axe. they meant trouble, she was sure, but it seemed distant, somewhere in the future. only for a
moment did the reading last, and then all she saw was elayne and nynaeve, watching her expectantly.
its down near the harbor, she said.
the sloping street became more crowded the further down they went. street peddlers rubbed elbows
with merchants who had brought wagons in from the inland villages and would not go out again until
winter had come and gone, hawkers with their trays called to the passersby, falmen in embroidered
cloaks brushed past farm families in heavy fleece coats. many people had fled here from villages further
from the coast. min saw no point to it  they had leaped from the possibility of a visit from the
seanchan to the certainty of seanchan all around them  but she had heard what the seanchan did
when they first came to a village, and she could not blame the villagers too much for fearing another
appearance. everyone bowed when seanchan walked past or a curtained palanquin was carried by up
the steep street.
min was glad to see nynaeve and elayne knew about the bowing. barechested bearers paid no more
mind to the people who bent themselves than did arrogant, armored soldiers, but failure to bow would
surely catch their eyes.
they talked a little as they moved down the street, and she was surprised at first to learn they had been
in the town only a few days less than egwene and herself. after a moment, though, she decided it was no
wonder they had not met earlier, not with the crowds in the streets. she had been reluctant to spend time
further from egwene than was necessary; there was always the fear that she would go for her allowed
visit and find egwene gone.and now she will be. unless nynaeve can think of something.
the smell of salt and pitch grew heavy in the air, and gulls cried, wheeling overhead. sailors appeared in
the throng, many still barefoot despite the cold.
the inn had been hastily renamed the three plum blossoms, but part of the word watcher still
showed through the slapdash paint work on the sign. despite the crowds outside, the common room was
little more than half full; prices were too high for many people to afford time sitting over ale. roaring fires
on hearths at either end of the room warmed it, and the fat innkeeper was in his shirtsleeves. he eyed the
three women, frowning, and min thought it was her seanchan dress that stopped him from telling them to
leave. nynaeve and elayne, in their farm womens coats, certainly did not look as if they had money to
spend.



the man she was looking for was alone at a table in a corner, in his accustomed place, muttering into his
wine. do you have time to talk, captain domon? she said.
he looked up, brushing a hand across his beard when he saw she was not alone. she still thought his
bare upper lip looked odd with the beard. so you do bring friends to drink up my coin, do you? well,
that seanchan lord bought my cargo, so coin i have. sit. elayne jumped as he suddenly bellowed,
innkeeper! mulled wine here!
its all right, min told her, taking a place on the end of one of the benches at the table. he only looks
and sounds like a bear. elayne sat down on the other end, looking doubtful.
a bear, do i be? domon laughed. maybe i do. but what of you, girl? have you given over thought of
leaving? that dress do look seanchan to me.
never! min said fiercely, but the appearance of a serving girl with the steaming, spiced wine made her
fall silent.
domon was just as wary. he waited until the girl had gone with his coins before saying, fortune prick
me, girl, i mean no offense. most people only want to go on with their lives, whether their lords be
seanchan or any other.
nynaeve leaned her forearms on the table. we also want to go on with our lives, captain, but without
any seanchan. i understand you intend to sail soon.
i would sail today, if i could, domon said glumly. every two or three days that turak do send for me
to tell him tales of the old things i have seen. do i look a gleeman to you? i did think i could spin a tale
or two and be on my way, but now i think when i no entertain him any longer, it be an even wager
whether he do let me go or have my head cut off. the man do look soft, but he be as hard as iron, and as
coldhearted.
can your ship avoid the seanchan? nynaeve asked.
fortune prick me, could i make it out of the harbor without adamane ripsspray to splinters, i can. if i
do no let a seanchan ship with adamane come too close once i do make the sea. there be shoal waters
all along this coast, andspray do have a shallow draft. i can take her into waters those lumbering
seanchan hulks can no risk. they must be wary of the winds close inshore this time of year, and once i
do havespray  
nynaeve cut him off. then we will take passage with you, captain. there will be four of us, and i will
expect you to be ready to sail as soon as we are aboard.
domon scrubbed a finger across his upper lip and peered into his wine. well, as to that, there still do
be the matter of getting out of the harbor, you see. thesedamane  
what if i tell you you will sail with something better thandamane ? nynaeve said softly. mins eyes
widened as she realized what nynaeve intended.
almost under her breath, elayne murmured, and you tell me to be careful.
domon had eyes only for nynaeve, and they were wary eyes. what do you mean? he whispered.



nynaeve opened her coat to fumble at the back of her neck, finally pulling out a leather cord that had
been tucked inside her dress. two gold rings hung on the cord. min gasped when she saw one  it was
the heavy mans ring she had seen when she read nynaeve in the street  but she knew it was the other,
slighter and made for a womans slender finger, that made domons eyes bulge. a serpent biting its own
tail.
you know what this means, nynaeve said, starting to slip the serpent ring from the cord, but domon
closed his hand over it.
put it away. his eyes darted uneasily; no one was looking at them that min could see, but he looked
as if he thought everyone was staring. that ring do be dangerous. if it be seen . . .
as long as you know what it means, nynaeve said with a calm that made min envious. she pulled the
cord from domons hand and retied it around her neck.
i know, he said hoarsely. i do know what it means. maybe there do be a chance if you . . . four, you
say? this girl who do like to listen to my tongue wag, she do be one of the four, i take it. and you, and .
. . he frowned at elayne. surely this child is no  no one like you.
elayne straightened angrily, but nynaeve put a hand on her arm and smiled soothingly at domon. she
travels with me, captain. you might be surprised by what we can do even before we earn the right to a
ring. when we sail, you will have three on your ship who can fightdamane if need be.
three, he breathed. there do be a chance. maybe . . . his face brightened for a moment, but as he
looked at them, it grew serious again. i should take you tospray right now and cast off, but fortune
prick me if i can no tell you what you face here if you stay, and maybe even if you go with me. listen to
me, and mark what i do say. he took another cautious look around, and still lowered his voice and
chose his words carefully. i did see a  a woman who wore a ring like that taken by the seanchan. a
pretty, slender little woman she was, with a big war  a big man with her who did look as if he did
know how to use his sword. one of them must have been careless, for the seanchan did have an ambush
laid for them. the big man put six, seven soldiers on the ground before he did die himself. the  the
woman . . . sixdamane they did put around her, stepping out of the alleys of a sudden. i did think she
would . . . do something  you know what i mean  but . . . i know nothing of these things. one
moment she did look as if she would destroy them all, then a look of horror did come on her face, and
she did scream.
they cut her off from the true source. elaynes face was white.
no matter, nynaeve said calmly. we will not allow the same to be done to us.
aye, mayhap it will be as you say. but i will remember it until i die. ryma, help me. that is what she
did scream. and one of thedamane did fall down crying, and they did put one of those collars on the
neck of the . . . woman, and i . . . i did run. he shrugged, and rubbed his nose, and peered into his
wine. i have seen three women taken, and i have no stomach for it. i would leave my aged grandmother
standing on the dock to sail from here, but i did have to tell you.
egwene said they have two prisoners, min said slowly. ryma, a yellow, and she didnt know who
the other is. nynaeve gave her a sharp look, and she fell silent, blushing. from the look on domons
face, it had not furthered their cause any to tell him the seanchan held two aes sedai, not just one.



yet abruptly he stared at nynaeve and took a long gulp of wine. do that be why you are here? to free
. . . those two? you did say there would be three of you.
you know what you need to know, nynaeve told him briskly. you must be ready to sail on the
instant anytime in the next two or three days. will you do it, or will you remain here to see if they will cut
off your head after all? there are other ships, captain, and i mean to have passage assured on one of
them today.
min held her breath; under the table, her fingers were knotted.
finally, domon nodded. i will be ready.
when they returned to the street, min was surprised to see nynaeve sag against the front of the inn as
soon as the door closed. are you ill, nynaeve? she asked anxiously.
nynaeve drew a long breath and stood up straight, tugging at her coat. with some people, she said,
you have to be certain. if you show them one glimmer of doubt, theyll sweep you off in some direction
you dont want to go. light, but i was afraid he was going to say no. come, we have plans yet to make.
there are still one or two small problems to work out.
i hope you dont mind fish, min, elayne said.
one or two small problems?min thought as she followed them. she hoped very much that nynaeve
was not just being certain again.

chapter 44

five will ride forth

perrin eyed the villagers warily, selfconsciously hitching at a tooshort cloak, embroidered on the chest
and with some holes in it not even patched, but none of them gave him a second glance despite his
strange mix of clothes and the axe on his hip. hurin had a coat with blue spirals across the chest under his
cloak, and mat wore a pair of baggy trousers that made bunches where they were stuffed into his boots.
that had been all they had been able to find that would fit back in the abandoned village. perrin
wondered if this one would be abandoned soon. half the stone houses were empty, and in front of the
inn, up the dirt street from them, three ox carts, loaded too heavily in great mounds and everything
covered with roped canvas, stood with families gathered around them.



as he watched them, huddling together and saying their goodbyes to those who were staying, at least for
the time being, perrin decided it was not lack of interest in strangers on the villagers part; they were
carefully avoiding looking at him and the others. these people had learned not to show curiosity about
strangers, even strangers who were obviously not seanchan. strangers might be dangerous these days on
toman head. they had encountered the same studious indifference in other villages. there were more
towns here within a few leagues of the coast, every one holding itself independent. at any rate, they had
until the seanchan came.
i say its time to go get the horses, mat said, before they decide to start asking questions. there has
to be a first time for it.
hurin was staring at a big, blackened circle of ground that marred the brown grass of the village green. it
had a weathered look, but no one had done anything to erase it. maybe six or eight months ago, he
muttered, and it still stinks. the whole village council and their families. why would they do a thing like
that?
who knows why they do anything? mat muttered. seanchan dont seem to need a reason for killing
people. none i can figure out, anyway.
perrin tried not to look at the charred patch. hurin, are you sure about fain? hurin? it had been hard
to make the sniffer look at anything else since they entered the village. hurin!
what? oh. fain. yes. hurins nostrils flared, and right away he wrinkled his nose. theres no
mistaking that, even old as it is. makes a myrddraal smell like roses. he passed through here all right, but
i think he was alone. no trollocs, anyway, and if he had any darkfriends with him, they hadnt been up
to much lately.
there was some sort of agitation up by the inn, people shouting and pointing. not at perrin and the other
two, but at something perrin could not see in the low hills east of the village.
can we get the horses now? mat said. that could be seanchan.
perrin nodded, and they broke into a run for where they had tied their horses behind an abandoned
house. as mat and hurin disappeared around the corner of the house, perrin looked back toward the
inn and stopped in astonishment. the children of the light were riding into town, a long column of them.
he leaped after the others. whitecloaks!
they wasted only an instant staring at him in disbelief before they were scrambling into their saddles.
keeping houses between them and the main street of the village, the three galloped out of the village
westward, watching over their shoulders for pursuit. ingtar had told them to avoid anything that might
slow them down, and whitecloaks asking questions would certainly do that, even if they could manage
answers that satisfied. perrin kept an even closer watch than the other two; he had his own reasons for
not wanting to meet whitecloaks.the axe in my hands. light, what i wouldnt give to change that.
the lightly wooded hills soon hid the village, and perrin began to think maybe there was nothing chasing
them after all. he reined in and motioned the other two to stop. when they did, eyeing him questioningly,
he listened. his ears were sharper than they once had been, but he heard no sounds of hoofbeats.
reluctantly, he reached out with his mind in search of wolves. almost immediately he found them, a



small pack, lying up for the day in the hills above the village they had just left. there were moments of
astonishment so strong he almost thought it was his own; these wolves had heard rumors, but they had
not really believed there were twolegs who could talk to their kind. he sweated through the minutes it
took to get past introducing himself  he gave the image of young bull in spite of himself, and added his
own smell, according to the custom among wolves; wolves were great ones for formalities on first
meetings  but finally he managed to get his question through. they really had no interest in any twolegs
who could not talk to them, but at last they glided down to take a look, unseen by the dull eyes of the
twolegs.
after a time, images came back to him, what the wolves saw. whitecloaked men on horses crowding
around the village, riding among the houses, riding around it, but none leaving. especially not westward.
the wolves said all they smelled moving west was himself and two other twolegs with three of the
hardfooted tall ones.
perrin let go the contact with the wolves gratefully. he was aware of hurin and mat looking at him.
they arent following, he said.
how can you be sure? mat demanded.
i am! he snapped, then more softly, i just am.
mat opened his mouth and closed it again, and finally said, well, if they arent coming after us, i say we
go back to ingtar and get on fains trail. that dagger isnt coming any closer just standing here.
we cant pick it up again this close to that village, hurin said. not without risking running into
whitecloaks. i dont think lord ingtar would appreciate that, and not verin sedai, neither.
perrin nodded. well follow it on a few miles, anyway. but keep a close lookout. we cant be too far
from falme, now. it wont do any good to avoid the whitecloaks and ride right into a seanchan patrol.
as they started out again, he could not help wondering what whitecloaks were doing there.
geofram bornhald peered down the village street, sitting his saddle while the legion spread through the
small town and surrounded it. there had been something about the heavyshouldered man who had
dashed out of sight, something that tickled his memory.yes, of course. the lad who claimed to be a
blacksmith. what was his name?
byar pulled up in front of him, hand on heart. the village is secured, my lord captain.
villagers in heavy sheepskin coats milled uneasily as whitecloaked soldiers herded them together near
the overloaded carts in front of the inn. crying children clung to their mothers skirts, but no one looked
defiant. dull eyes stared out of the adult faces, waiting passively for whatever was going to happen. for
that much, bornhald was grateful. he had no real desire to make an example of any of these people, and
no wish at all to waste time.
dismounting, he tossed his reins to one of the children. see that the men are fed, byar. put the
prisoners in the inn with as much food and water as they can carry, then nail all the doors and shutters
closed. make them think i am leaving some men to stand guard, yes?
byar touched his heart again and wheeled his horse to shout orders. the herding began anew, into the



flatroofed inn, while other children ransacked houses searching for hammers and nails.
watching the sullen faces that filed past him, bornhald thought it should be two or three days before any
of them found enough courage to break out of the inn and find there were no guards. two or three days
was all he needed, but he did not intend to risk alerting the seanchan to his presence now.
leaving enough men behind to make the questioners believe his entire legion was still scattered across
almoth plain, he had brought more than a thousand of the children nearly the length of toman head
without giving alarm, so far as he knew. three skirmishes with seanchan patrols had ended quickly. the
seanchan had grown used to facing already defeated rabble; the children of the light had been a deadly
surprise. yet the seanchan knew how to fight like the dark ones hordes, and he could not help
remembering the one skirmish that had cost him better than fifty men. he was still not sure which of the
two arrowriddled women he had stared at afterwards had been the aes sedai.
byar! one of bornhalds men handed him water in a pottery cup from one of the carts; it was icy in his
throat.
the gauntfaced man swung down from his saddle. yes, my lord captain?
when i engage the enemy, byar, bornhald said slowly, you will not take part. you will watch from a
distance, and you will carry word to my son of what happens.
but my lord captain  !
that is my order, child byar! he snapped. you will obey, yes?
byars back stiffened, and he stared straight ahead. as you command, my lord captain.
bornhald studied him for a moment. the man would do as he was told, but it would be better to give
him another reason than letting dain know how his father had died. it was not as if he did not have
knowledge that was urgently needed in amador. since that skirmish with the aes sedai was it one of
them, or both? thirty seanchan soldiers, good fighters, and two women cost me twice the
casualties they did .  since then, he no longer expected to live to leave toman head. in the small
chance the seanchan did not see to it, very likely the questioners would.
when you have found my son  he should be with lord captain eamon valda near tar valon  and
told him, you will ride to amador, and report to the lord captain commander. to pedron niall
personally, child byar. you will tell him what we have learned of the seanchan; i will write it out for you.
be sure he understands that we can no longer count on the tar valon witches being content with
manipulating events from the shadows. if they fight openly for the seanchan, we will surely face them
elsewhere. he hesitated. that last was the most important of all. they had to know under the dome of
truth that for all their vaunted oaths, aes sedai would march into battle. it gave him a sinking feeling, a
world where aes sedai wielded the power in battle; he was not sure that he would regret leaving it. but
there was one more message he wanted carried to amador. and, byar . . . tell pedron niall how we
were used by the questioners.
as you command, my lord captain, byar said, but bornhald sighed at the expression on his face. the
man did not understand. to byar, orders were to be obeyed whether they came from the lord captain
or the questioners, whatever they were.
i will write that out for you to hand to pedron niall as well, he said. he was not sure how much good



it would do in any case. a thought came to him, and he frowned at the inn, where some of his men were
loudly hammering nails through shutters and doors. perrin, he muttered. that was his name. perrin,
from the two rivers.
the darkfriend, my lord captain?
perhaps, byar. he was not entirely certain, himself, but surely a man who seemed to have wolves fight
for him could be nothing else. certainly, this perrin had killed two of the children. i thought i saw him
when we rode in, but i do not remember anyone among the prisoners who looked like a blacksmith.
their blacksmith left a month ago, my lord captain. some of them were complaining that theyd have
been gone before we came if they had not had to mend their cartwheels themselves. do you believe it
was the man perrin, my lord captain?
whoever it was, he is not accounted for, no? and he may carry word of us to the seanchan.
a darkfriend would surely do so, my lord captain.
bornhald gulped the last of the water and tossed the cup aside. there will be no meal for the men here,
byar. i will not let these seanchan catch me napping, whether it is perrin of the two rivers or someone
else who warns them. mount the legion, child byar!
far above their heads, a huge, winged shape circled, unnoticed.
in the clearing amid the hilltop thicket where they had made their camp, rand worked the forms with his
sword. he wanted to keep from thinking. he had had his chances to search with hurin for fains trail;
they all had, in twos and threes so they would not attract attention, and they had all found nothing so far.
now they waited for mat and perrin to come back with the sniffer; they should have been back hours
ago.
loial was reading, of course, and there was no telling if his eartwitching was over his book or the
scouting partys lateness, but uno and most of the shienaran soldiers sat tensely, oiling their swords, or
kept watch through the trees as if they expected seanchan to appear any moment. only verin appeared
unconcerned. the aes sedai sat on a log beside their small fire, murmuring to herself and writing in the
dirt with a long stick; every so often she would shake her head and scrub it all out with her foot and start
over again. all the horses were saddled and ready to go, the shienarans animals each tied to a lance
driven into the ground.
heron wading in the rushes, ingtar said. he sat with his back against a tree, sliding a sharpening
stone along his sword and watching rand. you should not be bothering with that one. it leaves you
completely open.
for an instant rand balanced on the ball of one foot, sword held reversed in both hands over his head,
then shifted smoothly to the other foot. lan says its good for developing balance. it was not easy
keeping his balance. in the void it often seemed he could maintain his equilibrium atop a rolling boulder,
but he did not dare assume the void. he wanted to too much to trust himself.
what you practice too often, you use without thinking. you will put your sword in the other man with
that, if youre quick, but not before he has his through your ribs. you are practically inviting him. i dont
think i could see a man face me so open and not put my sword in him, even knowing he might strike
home at me if i did.



its only for balance, ingtar.  rand wavered on one foot, and had to put the other down to keep from
falling. he slammed the blade into its scabbard and picked up the gray cloak that had been his disguise. it
was motheaten, and ragged around the bottom, but lined with thick fleece, and the wind was picking up,
cold and out of the west. i wish theyd come back.
as if his wish had been a signal, uno spoke up with quiet urgency. bloody horsemen coming, my
lord. scabbards rattled as men who did not already have their blades out bared them. some leaped
into their saddles, snatching up lances.
the tension faded as hurin led the others into the clearing at a trot, and came again as he spoke. we
found the trail, lord ingtar.
we followed it almost to falme, mat said as he dismounted. a flush in his pale cheeks seemed a
mocking of health; the skin was tight over his skull. the shienarans gathered around, as excited as he
was. its just fain, but there isnt anywhere else he could be going. he must have the dagger.
we found whitecloaks, too, perrin said, swinging down from his saddle. hundreds of them.
whitecloaks? ingtar exclaimed, frowning. here? well, if they do not trouble us, we will not trouble
them. perhaps if the seanchan are occupied with them, it will help us reach the horn. his eyes fell on
verin, still seated by the fire. i suppose you will tell me i should have listened to you, aes sedai. the
man did go to falme.
the wheel weaves as the wheel wills, verin said placidly. withtaveren , what happens is what was
meant to happen. it may be the pattern demanded these extra days. the pattern puts everything in its
place precisely, and when we try to alter it, especially iftaveren are involved, the weaving changes to
put us back into the pattern as we were meant to be. there was an uneasy silence that she did not seem
to notice; she sketched on idly with the stick. now, however, i think perhaps we should make plans.
the pattern has brought us to falme at last. the horn of valere has been taken to falme.
ingtar squatted across the fire from her. when enough people say the same thing, i tend to believe it,
and the local people say the seanchan do not seem to care who comes or goes in falme. i will take
hurin and a few others into the town. once he follows fains trail to the horn . . . well, then we shall see
what we shall see.
with her foot, verin scrubbed out a wheel she had drawn in the dirt. in its place she drew two short
lines that touched at one end. ingtar and hurin. and mat, as he can sense the dagger if he comes close
enough. you do want to go, dont you, mat?
mat appeared torn, but he gave a jerky nod. i have to, dont i? i have to find that dagger.
a third line made a bird track. verin looked sideways at rand.
ill go, he said. that is why i came. an odd light appeared in the aes sedais eyes, a knowing
glimmer that made him uneasy. to help mat find the dagger, he said sharply, and ingtar find the
horn.and fain , he added to himself.i have to find fain if it isnt already too late.
verin scratched a fourth line, turning the bird track to a lopsided star. and who else? she said softly.
she held the stick poised.



me, perrin said, a hair before loial chimed in with, i think i would like to go, too, and uno and the
other shienarans all began clamoring to join.
perrin spoke first, verin said, as if that settled it. she added a fifth line and drew a circle around all
five. the hair on rands neck stirred; it was the same wheel she had rubbed out in the first place. five
ride forth, she murmured.
i really would like to see falme, loial said. ive never seen the aryth ocean. besides, i can carry the
chest, if the horn is still in it.
youd better include me at least, my lord, uno said. you and lord rand will need another sword at
your backs if those bloody seanchan try to stop you. the rest of the soldiers rumbled the same
sentiment.
do not be silly, verin said sharply. her stare silenced them all. all of you cannot go. no matter how
uncaring the seanchan are about strangers, they will surely take notice of twenty soldiers, and you look
like nothing else even without armor. and one or two of you will make no difference. five is few enough
to enter without attracting attention, and it is fitting that three of them should be the threetaveren among
us. no, loial, you must stay behind, too. there are no ogier on toman head. you would attract as
many eyes as all the rest put together.
what about you? rand asked.
verin shook her head. you forget thedamane . her mouth twisted around the word in distaste. the
only way i could help you would be if i channeled the power, and that would be no help at all if i brought
those down on you. even if they were not close enough to see, one might well feel a woman  or a man,
for that matter  channeling, if care was not taken to keep the power channeled small. she did not
look at rand; to him, she seemed ostentatious in not doing so, and mat and perrin were suddenly intent
on their own feet.
a man, ingtar snorted. verin sedai, why add problems? we have enough already without supposing
men channeling. but it would be well if you were there. if we have need of you  
no, you five must go alone. her foot scrubbed across the wheel drawn in the dirt, partially obliterating
it. she studied each of them in turn, intent and frowning. five will ride forth.
for a moment it seemed that ingtar would ask again, but meeting her level gaze, he shrugged and turned
to hurin. how long to reach falme?
the sniffer scratched his head. if we left now and rode through the night, we could be there by sunrise
tomorrow morning.
then that is what we will do. ill waste no more time. all of you saddle your horses. uno, i warn you to
bring the others along behind us, but keep out of sight, and do not let anyone . . .
rand peered at the sketched wheel as ingtar went on with his instructions. it was a broken wheel, now,
with only four spokes. for some reason that made him shiver. he realized verin was watching him, dark
eyes bright and intent like a birds. it took an effort to pull his gaze away and begin getting his things
together.
youre letting fancies take you, he told himself irritably.she cant do anything if she isnt there.



chapter 45

blademaster

the rising sun pushed its crimson edge above the horizon and sent long shadows down the cobblestone
streets of falme toward the harbor. a sea breeze bent the smoke of breakfast cook fires inland from the
chimneys. only the early risers were already out of doors, their breath making steam in the morning cold.
compared to the crowds that would fill the streets in another hour, the town seemed nearly empty.
sitting on an upended barrel in front of a stillclosed ironmongers shop, nynaeve warmed her hands
under her arms and surveyed her army. min sat on a doorstep across the way, swathed in her seanchan
cloak and eating a wrinkled plum, and elayne in her fleece coat huddled at the edge of an alley just down
the street from her. a large sack, pilfered from the docks, lay neatly folded beside min.my army ,
nynaeve thought grimly.but there isnt anybody else.
she caught sight of asuldam and adamane climbing the street, a yellowhaired woman wearing the
bracelet and a dark woman the collar, both yawning sleepily. the few falmen sharing the street with
them averted their eyes and gave them a wide berth. as far as she could see down toward the harbor,
there was not another seanchan. she did not turn her head the other way. instead, she stretched and
shrugged as if working cold shoulders before settling back as she had been.
min tossed her halfeaten plum aside, glanced casually up the street, and leaned back on the doorpost.
the way was clear there, too, or she would have put her hands on her knees. min had started rubbing
her hands nervously, and nynaeve realized that elayne was now bouncing eagerly on her toes.
if they give us away, ill thump both their heads. but she knew if they were discovered, it would be
the seanchan who would say what happened to all three of them. she was all too aware that she had no
real notion of whether what she planned would work or not. it could easily be her own failure that would
give them away. once again she resolved that if anything went wrong, she would somehow pull attention
to herself while min and elayne escaped. she had told them to run if anything went wrong, and let them
think she would run, too. what she would do then, she did not know.except i wont let them take me
alive. please, light, not that.
suldamanddamane came up the street until they were bracketed by the three waiting women. a dozen
falmen walked wide of the linked pair.
nynaeve gathered all of her anger. leashed ones and leash holders. they had put their filthy collar on
egwenes neck, and they would put it on hers, and elaynes, if they could. she had made min tell her



howsuldam enforced their will. she was sure min had kept some back, the worst, but what she told
was enough to heat nynaeve to whitehot fury. in an instant a white blossom on a black, thorny branch
had opened to light, tosaidar , and the one power filled her. she knew there was a glow around her, for
those who could see it. the paleskinnedsuldam gave a start, and the darkdamane s mouth fell open,
but nynaeve gave them no chance. it was only a trickle of the power that she channeled, but she
cracked it, a whip snapping a dust mote out of the air.
the silver collar sprang open and clattered to the cobblestones. nynaeve heaved a sigh of relief even as
she leaped to her feet.
thesuldam stared at the fallen collar as if at a poisonous snake. thedamane put a shaking hand to her
throat, but before the woman in the lightningmarked dress had time to move, thedamane turned and
punched her in the face; thesuldam s knees buckled, and she almost fell.
good for you! elayne shouted. she was already running forward, too, and so was min.
before any of them reached the two women, thedamane took one startled look around, then ran as
hard as she could.
we wont hurt you! elayne called after her. we are friends!
be quiet! nynaeve hissed. she produced a handful of rags from her pocket and ruthlessly stuffed them
into the gaping mouth of the still staggeringsuldam . min hastily shook out the sack in a cloud of dust
and plunged it over thesuldam s head, shrouding the woman to the waist. we are already attracting
too much attention.
it was true, and yet not entirely true. the four of them stood in a rapidly emptying street, but the people
who had decided to be elsewhere were avoiding looking at them. nynaeve had been counting on that 
people doing their best to ignore anything that had to do with seanchan  to gain them a few moments.
they would talk eventually, but in whispers; it might take hours for the seanchan to learn anything had
happened.
the hooded woman began to struggle, making ragmuffled shouts from the sack, but nynaeve and min
threw their arms around her and wrestled her toward a nearby alley. the leash and collar trailed across
the cobblestones behind them, clinking.
pick it up, nynaeve snapped at elayne. it wont bite you!
elayne took a deep breath, then gathered the silver metal gingerly, as if she feared it very well might.
nynaeve felt some sympathy, but not much; everything rested on each of them doing as they had
planned.
thesuldam kicked and tried to throw herself free, but between them, nynaeve and min forced her
along, down the alley into another, slightly wider passage behind houses, to yet another alley and at last
into a rough wooden shed that had apparently once housed two horses, by the stalls. few could afford to
keep horses since the seanchan came, and in a day of nynaeves watching, no one had gone near it. the
interior had a musty dustiness that spoke of abandonment. as soon as they were inside, elayne dropped
the silver leash and wiped her hands on some straw.
nynaeve channeled another trickle, and the bracelet fell to the dirt floor. thesuldam squalled and
hurled herself about.



ready? nynaeve asked. the other two nodded, and they yanked the sacking off their prisoner.
thesuldam wheezed, blue eyes teary from dust, but her red face was red as much from anger as from
the sack. she darted for the door, but they caught her in the first step. she was not weak, yet they were
three, and when they were done thesuldam was stripped to her shift and lying in one of the stalls, bound
hand and foot with stout cord, with another piece of cord to keep her from forcing the gag out.
soothing a puffy lip, min eyed the lightningpaneled dress and soft boots they had laid out. it might fit
you, nynaeve. it wont fit elayne or me. elayne was picking straw out of her hair.
i can see that. you were never a choice anyway, not really. they know you too well. nynaeve
hurriedly removed her own clothes. she tossed them aside and donned thesuldam s dress. min helped
with the buttons.
nynaeve wiggled her toes in the boots; they were a little tight. the dress was tight, too, across the
bosom, and loose elsewhere. the hem hung almost to the ground, lower thansuldam wore them, but the
fit would have been even worse on any of the others. snatching up the bracelet, she took a deep breath
and closed it around her left wrist. the ends merged, and it seemed solid. it did not feel like anything
except a bracelet. she had been afraid that it would.
get the dress, elayne. they had dyed a pair of dresses  one of hers and one of elaynes  to the
graydamane wore, or as close as they could manage, and hidden them here. elayne did not move except
to stare at the open collar and lick her lips. elayne, you have to wear it. too many of them have seen
min for her to do it. i would have worn it, if this dress had fit you instead. she thought she would have
gone mad if she had had to wear the collar; that was why she could not make her voice sharp with
elayne now.
i know. elayne sighed. i just wish i knew more of what it does to you. she drew her redgold hair
out of the way. min, help me, please. min began undoing the buttons down the back of her dress.
nynaeve managed to pick up the silver collar without flinching. there is one way to find out. with only
a moment of hesitation, she bent and snapped it around the neck of thesuldam .she deserves it if
anyone does , she told herself firmly. she might be able to tell us something useful, anyway. the
blueeyed woman glanced at the leash trailing from her neck to nynaeves wrist, then glared up at her
contemptuously.
it doesnt work that way, min said, but nynaeve barely heard.
she was . . . aware . . . of the other woman, aware of what she was feeling, cord digging into her ankles
and into her wrists behind her back, the rank fish taste of the rags in her mouth, straw pricking her
through the thin cloth of her shift. it was not as if she, nynaeve, felt these things, but in her head was a
lump of sensations that she knew belonged to thesuldam.
she swallowed, trying to ignore them  they would not go away  and addressed the bound woman.
i wont hurt you if you answer my questions truthfully. we arent seanchan. but if you lie to me . . .
she lifted the leash threateningly.
the womans shoulders shook, and her mouth curled around the gag in a sneer. it took nynaeve a
moment to realize thesuldam was laughing.



her mouth tightened, but then a thought came to her. that bundle of sensation inside her head seemed to
be everything physical that the other woman felt. experimentally, she tried adding to it.
eyes suddenly bulging out of her head, thesuldam gave a cry that the gag only partially stopped.
fanning her hands behind her as if trying to ward off something, she humped through the straw in a vain
effort to escape.
nynaeve gaped, and hastily rid herself of the extra feelings she had added. thesuldam sagged,
weeping.
what . . . what did you . . . do to her? elayne asked faintly. min only stared, her mouth hanging open.
nynaeve answered gruffly. the same thing sheriam did to you when you threw a cup at marith.light,
but this is a filthy thing.
elayne gulped loudly. oh.
but anadam isnt supposed to work that way, min said. they always claimed it wont work on any
woman who cannot channel.
i do not care how it is supposed to work, so long as it does. nynaeve seized the silver metal leash
right where it joined the collar, and pulled the woman up enough to look her in the eyes. frightened eyes,
she saw. you listen to me, and listen well. i want answers, and if i dont get them, ill make you think i
have had the hide off you. stark terror rolled across the womans face, and nynaeves stomach heaved
as she suddenly realized thesuldam had taken her literally.if she thinks i can, its because she knows.
that is what these leashes are for . she took firm hold of herself to stop from clawing the bracelet off
her wrist. instead, she hardened her face. are you ready to answer me? or do you need more
convincing?
the frantic headshaking was answer enough. when nynaeve removed the gag, the woman only paused
to swallow once before babbling, i will not report you. i swear it. only take this from my neck. i have
gold. take it. i swear, i will never tell anyone.
be quiet, nynaeve snapped, and the woman shut her mouth immediately. what is your name?
seta. please. i will answer you, but please take  it  off! if anyone sees it on me . . . setas eyes
rolled down to stare at the leash, then squeezed shut. please? she whispered.
nynaeve realized something. she could never make elayne wear that collar.
best we get on with it, elayne said firmly. she was down to her shift, too, now. give me a moment to
put this other dress on, and  
put your own clothes back on, nynaeve said.
someone has to pretend to be adamane , elayne said, or we will never reach egwene. that dress fits
you, and it cannot be min. that leaves me.
i said put your clothes on. we have somebody to be our leashed one. nynaeve tugged at the leash
that held seta, and thesuldam gasped.



no! no, please! if anyone sees me   she cut off at nynaeves cold stare.
as far as i am concerned, you are worse than a murderer, worse than a darkfriend. i cant think of
anything worse than you. the fact that i have to wear this thing on my wrist, to be the same as you for
even an hour, sickens me. so if you think there is anything ill balk at doing to you, think again. you
dont want to be seen? good. neither do we. no one really looks at adamane , though. as long as you
keep your head down the way a leashed one is supposed to, no one will even notice you. but you had
better do the best you can to make sure the rest of us arent noticed, either. if we are, you surely will be
seen, and if that is not enough to hold you, i promise you ill make you curse the first kiss your mother
ever gave your father. do we understand each other?
yes, seta said faintly. i swear it.
nynaeve had to remove the bracelet in order for them to slide elaynes graydyed dress down the leash
and over setas head. it did not fit the woman well, being loose at the bosom and tight across the hips,
but nynaeves would have been as bad, and too short besides. nynaeve hoped people really did not
look atdamane . she put the bracelet back on reluctantly.
elayne gathered up nynaeves clothes, wrapped the other dyed dress around them, and made a bundle,
a bundle for a woman in farm clothes to be carrying as she followed asuldam and adamane . gawyn
will eat his heart out when he hears about this, she said, and laughed. it sounded forced.
nynaeve looked at her closely, then at min. it was time for the dangerous part. are you ready?
elaynes smile faded. i am ready.
ready, min said curtly.
where are you . . . we . . . going? seta said, quickly adding, if i may ask?
into the lions den, elayne told her.
to dance with the dark one, min said.
nynaeve sighed and shook her head. what they are trying to say is, we are going where all thedamane
are kept, and we intend to free one of them.
seta was still gaping in astonishment when they hustled her out of the shed.

bayle domon watched the rising sun from the deck of his ship. the docks were already beginning to
bustle, though the streets leading up from the harbor stood largely empty. a gull perched on a piling
stared at him; gulls had pitiless eyes.
are you sure about this, captain? yarin asked. if the seanchan wonder what were all doing aboard

you just make certain there do be an axe near every mooring line, domon said curtly. and, yarin?
do any man try to cut a line before those women are aboard, i will split his skull.



what if they dont come, captain? what if its seanchan soldiers instead?
settle your bowels, man! if soldiers come, i will make a run for the harbor mouth, and the light have
mercy on us all. but until soldiers do come, i mean to wait for those women. now go look as if you are
no doing anything.
domon turned back to peering up into the town, toward where thedamane were held. his fingers
drummed a nervous tattoo on the railing.

the breeze from the sea brought the smell of breakfast cook fires to rands nose, and tried to flap at his
motheaten cloak, but he held it closed with one hand as red neared the town. there had not been a
coat to fit him in the clothes they had found, and he thought it best to keep the fine silver embroidery on
his sleeves and the herons on his collar hidden. the seanchan attitude toward conquered people carrying
weapons might not extend to those with heronmark swords, either.
the first shadows of morning stretched out ahead of him. he could just see hurin riding in among the
wagon yards and horse lots. only one or two men moved among the lines of merchant wagons, and they
wore the long aprons of wheelwrights or blacksmiths. ingtar, the first in, was already out of sight. perrin
and mat followed behind rand at spaced intervals. he did not look back to check on them. there was
not supposed to be anything to connect them; five men coming into falme at an early hour, but not
together.
the horse lots surrounded him, horses already crowding the fences, waiting to be fed. hurin put his head
out from between two stables, their doors still closed and barred, saw rand and motioned to him before
ducking back. rand turned the bay stallion that way.
hurin stood holding his horse by the reins. he had on one of the long vests instead of his coat, and
despite the heavy cloak that hid his short sword and swordbreaker, he shivered with the cold. lord
ingtars back there, he said, nodding down the narrow passage. he says well leave the horses here
and go the rest of the way on foot. as rand dismounted, the sniffer added, fain went right down that
street, lord rand. i can almost smell it from here.
rand led red down the way to where ingtar had already tied his own behind the stable. the shienaran
did not look very much like a lord in a dirty fleece coat with holes worn through the leather in several
places, and his sword looked odd belted over it. his eyes had a feverish intensity.
tying red alongside ingtars stallion, rand hesitated over his saddlebags. he had not wanted to leave
the banner behind. he did not think any of the soldiers would have gone into the bags, but he could not
say the same for verin, nor predict what she would do if she found the banner. still, it made him uneasy
to have it with him. he decided to leave the saddlebags tied behind his saddle.
mat joined them, and a few moments later hurin came with perrin. mat wore baggy trousers stuffed into
the tops of his boots, and perrin his tooshort cloak. rand thought they all looked like villainous beggars,
but they had all passed largely unnoticed in the villages.
now, ingtar said, let us see what we see.
they strolled out to the dirt street as if they had no particular destination in mind, talking among
themselves, and ambled past the wagon yards onto sloping cobblestone streets. rand was not sure what



he himself said, much less anyone else. ingtars plan had been for them to look like any other group of
men walking together, but there were all too few people outofdoors. five men made a crowd in those
cold morning streets.
they walked in a bunch, but it was hurin who led them, sniffing the air and turning up this street and
down that. the rest turned when he did, as if that was what they had intended all along. hes
crisscrossed this town, hurin muttered, grimacing. his smell is everywhere, and it stinks so, its hard to
tell old from new. at least i know hes still here. some of it cannot be older than a day or two, im sure.
i am sure, he added less doubtfully.
a few more people began to appear, here a fruit peddler setting his wares on tables, there a fellow
hurrying along with a big roll of parchments under his arm and a sketchboard slung across his back, a
knifesharpener oiling the shaft of his grinding wheel on its barrow. two women walked by, headed the
other way, one with downcast eyes and a silver collar around her neck, the other, in a dress worked with
lightning bolts, holding a coiled silver leash.
rands breath caught; it was an effort not to look back at them.
was that . . . ? mats eyes were open wide, staring out of the hollows of his eye sockets. was that a
damane ?
that is the way they were described, ingtar said curtly. hurin, are we going to walk every street in
this shadowcursed town?
hes been everywhere, lord ingtar, hurin said. his stench is everywhere. they had come into an
area where the stone houses were three and four stories high, as big as inns.
they rounded a corner, and rand was taken aback by the sight of a score of seanchan soldiers standing
guard in front of a big house on one side of the street  and by the sight of two women in
lightningmarked dresses talking on the doorsteps of another across from it. a banner flapped in the wind
over the house the soldiers protected; a golden hawk clutching lightning bolts. nothing marked out the
house where the women talked except themselves. the officers armor was resplendent in red and black
and gold, his helmet gilded and painted to look like a spiders head. then rand saw the two big,
leatheryskinned shapes crouched among the soldiers and missed a step.
grolm. there was no mistaking those wedgeshaped heads with their three eyes.they cant be .
perhaps he was really asleep, and this was all a nightmare.maybe we havent even left for falme yet.
the others stared at the beasts as they walked past the guarded house.
what in the name of the light are they? mat asked.
hurins eyes seemed as big as his face. lord rand, theyre . . .those are . . .
it doesnt matter, rand said. after a moment, hurin nodded.
we are here for the horn, ingtar said, not to stare at seanchan monsters. concentrate on finding fain,
hurin.
the soldiers barely glanced at them. the street ran straight down to the round harbor. rand could see
ships anchored down there; tall, squarelooking ships with high masts, small in that distance.



hes been here a lot. hurin scrubbed at his nose with the back of his hand. the street stinks of layer
on layer of him. i think he might have been here as late as yesterday, lord ingtar. maybe last night.
mat suddenly clutched his coat with both hands. its in there, he whispered. he turned arond and
walked backwards, peering at the tall house with the banner. the dagger is in there. i didnt even notice
it before, because of those  those things, but i can feel it.
perrin poked a finger in his ribs. well stop that before they start wondering why youre goggling at them
like a fool.
rand glanced over his shoulder. the officer was looking after them.
mat turned around sullenly. are we just going to keep on walking? its in there, i tell you.
the horn is what we are after, ingtar growled. i mean to find fain and make him tell me where it is.
he did not slow down.
mat said nothing, but his entire face was a plea.
i have to find fain, too, rand thought.i have to . but when he looked at mats face, he said, ingtar,
if the dagger is in that house, fain likely is too. i cant see him letting the dagger or the horn, either one,
far out of his sight.
ingtar stopped. after a moment, he said, it could be, but we will never know from out here.
we could watch for him to come out, rand said. if he comes out at this time of the morning, then he
spent the night there. and ill wager where he sleeps is where the horn is. if he does come out, we can
be back to verin by midday and have a plan made before nightfall.
i do not mean to wait for verin, ingtar said, and neither will i wait for night. ive waited too long
already. i mean to have the horn in my hands before the sun sets again.
but we dont know, ingtar.
i know the dagger is in there, mat said.
and hurin says fain was here last night. ingtar overrode hurins attempts to qualify that. it is the first
time you have been willing to say anything closer than a day or two. we are going to take back the horn
now. now!
how? rand said. the officer was no longer watching them, but there were still at least twenty soldiers
in front of the building. and a pair ofgrolm .this is madness. there cant be grolmhere . thinking it did
not make the beasts disappear, though.
there seem to be gardens behind all these houses, ingtar said, looking around thoughtfully. if one of
those alleys runs by a garden wall . . . sometimes men are so busy guarding their front, they neglect their
back. come. he headed straight for the nearest narrow passage between two of the tall houses. hurin
and mat trotted right after him.
rand exchanged looks with perrin  his curlyhaired friend gave a resigned shrug  and they



followed, too.
the alley was barely wider than their shoulders, but it ran between high garden walls until it crossed
another alley big enough for a pushbarrow or small cart. that was cobblestoned, too, but only the backs
of buildings looked down on it, shuttered windows and expanses of stone, and the high back walls of
gardens overtopped by nearly leafless branches.
ingtar led them along that alley until they were opposite the waving banner. taking his steelbacked
gauntlets from under his coat, he put them on and leaped up to catch the top of the wall, then pulled
himself up enough to peek over. he reported in a low monotone. trees. flower beds. walks. there
isnt a soul to be  wait! a guard. one man. he isnt even wearing his helmet. count to fifty, then
follow me. he swung a boot to the top of the wall and rolled over inside, disappearing before rand
could say a word.
mat began to count slowly. rand held his breath. perrin fingered his axe, and hurin gripped the hilts of
his weapons.
. . . fifty. hurin scrambled up and over the wall before the word was well out of mats mouth. perrin
went right beside him.
rand thought mat might need some help  he looked so pale and drawn  but he gave no sign of it as
he scrambled up. the stone wall provided plenty of handholds, and moments later rand was crouched
on the inside with mat and perrin and hurin.
the garden was in the grip of deep autumn, flower beds empty except for a few evergreen shrubs, tree
branches nearly bare. the wind that rippled the banner stirred dust across the flagstone walks. for a
moment rand could not find ingtar. then he saw the shienaran, flat against the back wall of the house,
motioning them on with sword in hand.
rand ran in a crouch, more conscious of the windows blankly peering down from the house than of his
friends running beside him. it was a relief to press himself against the house beside ingtar.
mat kept muttering to himself, its in there. i can feel it.
where is the guard? rand whispered.
dead, ingtar said. the man was overconfident. he never even tried to raise a cry. i hid his body
under one of those bushes.
rand stared at him.the seanchanwas overconfident ? the only thing that kept him from going back
right then was mats anguished murmurs.
we are almost there. ingtar sounded as if he were speaking to himself, too. almost there. come.
rand drew his sword as they started up the back steps. he was aware of hurin unlimbering his
shortbladed sword and notched swordbreaker, and perrin reluctantly drawing his axe from the loop on
his belt.
the hallway inside was narrow. a halfopen door to their right smelled like a kitchen. several people
were moving about in that room; there was an indistinguishable sound of voices, and occasionally the soft
clatter of a pot lid.



ingtar motioned mat to lead, and they crept by the door. rand watched the narrowing opening until they
were around the next corner.
a slender young woman with dark hair came out of a door ahead of them, carrying a tray with one cup.
they all froze. she turned the other way without looking in their direction. rands eyes widened. her
long white robe was all but transparent. she vanished around another corner.
did you see that? mat said hoarsely. you could see right through  
ingtar clapped a hand over mats mouth and whispered, keep your mind on why we are here. now
find it. find the horn for me.
mat pointed to a narrow set of winding stairs. they climbed a flight, and he led them toward the front of
the house. the furnishings in the hallways were sparse, and seemed all curves. here and there a tapestry
hung on a wall, or a folding screen stood against it, each painted with a few birds on branches, or a
flower or two. a river flowed across one screen, but aside from rippling water and narrow strips of
riverbank, the rest of it was blank.
all around them rand could hear the sounds of people stirring, slippers scuffing on the floor, soft
murmurs of speech. he did not see anyone, but he could imagine it all too well, someone stepping into
the hall to see five slinking men with weapons in their hands, shouting an alarm . . .
in there, mat whispered, pointing to a big pair of sliding doors ahead, carved handholds their only
ornamentation. at least, the dagger is.
ingtar looked at hurin; the sniffer slid the doors open, and ingtar leaped through with his sword ready.
there was no one there. rand and the others hurried inside, and hurin quickly closed the doors behind
them.
painted screens hid all the walls and any other doors, and veiled the light coming through windows that
had to overlook the street. at one end of the big room stood a tall, circular cabinet. at the other was a
small table, the lone chair on the carpet turned to face it. rand heard ingtar gasp, but he only felt like
heaving a sigh of relief. the curling golden horn of valere sat on a stand on the table. below it, the ruby
in the hilt of the ornate dagger caught the light.
mat darted to the table, snatching horn and dagger. we have it, he crowed, shaking the dagger in his
fist. we have both of them.
not so loud, perrin said with a wince. we dont have them out of here, yet. his hands were busy on
the haft of his axe; they seemed to want to be holding something else.
the horn of valere. there was sheer awe in ingtars voice. he touched the horn hesitantly, tracing a
finger along the silver script inlaid around the bell and mouthing the translation, then pulled his hand back
with a shiver of excitement. it is. by the light, it is! i am saved.
hurin was moving the screens that hid the windows. he shoved the last out of his way and peered into
the street below. those soldiers are all still there, looking like theyve took root. he shuddered. those
. . . things, too.
rand went to join him. the two beasts weregrolm ; there was no denying it. how did they . . . as he



lifted his eyes from the street, words died. he was looking over a wall into the garden of the big house
across the street. he could see where further walls had been torn down, joining other gardens to it.
women sat on benches there, or strolled along the walks, always in pairs. women linked, neck to wrist,
by silver leashes. one of the women with a collar around her neck looked up. he was too far to make
out her face clearly, but for an instant it seemed that their eyes met, and he knew. the blood drained
from his face. egwene, he breathed.
what are you talking about? mat said. egwene is safe in tar valon. i wish i were.
shes here, rand said. the two women were turning, walking toward one of the buildings on the far
side of the joined gardens. she is there, right across the street. oh, light, shes wearing one of those
collars!
are you sure? perrin said. he came to peer from the window. i dont see her, rand. and  and i
could recognize her if i did, even at this distance.
i am sure, rand said. the two women disappeared into one of the houses that faced the next street
over. his stomach was twisted into a knot.she is supposed to be safe. shes supposed to be in the
white tower . i have to get her out. the rest of you  
so! the slurring voice was as soft as the sound of the doors sliding in their tracks. you are not who i
expected.
for a brief moment, rand stared. the tall man with the shaven head who had stepped into the room
wore a long, trailing blue robe, and his fingernails were so long that rand wondered if he could handle
anything. the two men standing obsequiously behind him had only half their dark hair shaved, the rest
hanging in a dark braid down each mans right cheek. one of them cradled a sheathed sword in his arms.
it was only a moment he had for staring, then screens toppled to reveal, at either end of the room, a
doorway crowded with four or five seanchan soldiers, bareheaded but armored, and swords in hand.
you are in the presence of the high lord turak, the man who carried the sword began, staring at
rand and the others angrily, but a brief motion of a finger with a bluelacquered nail cut him short. the
other servant stepped forward with a bow and began undoing turaks robe.
when one of my guards was found dead, the shavenheaded man said calmly, i suspected the man
who calls himself fain. i have been suspicious of him since huon died so mysteriously, and he has always
wanted that dagger. he held out his arms for the servant to remove his robe. despite his soft,
almostsinging voice, hard muscles roped his arms and smooth chest, which was bare to a blue sash
holding wide, white trousers that seemed made of hundreds of pleats. he sounded uninterested, and
indifferent to the blades in their hands. and now to find strangers with not only the dagger, but the horn.
it will please me to kill one or two of you for disturbing my morning. those who survive will tell me of
who you are and why you came. he stretched out a hand without looking  the man with the
scabbarded sword laid the hilt in the hand  and drew the heavy, curved blade. i would not have the
horn damaged.
turak gave no other signal, but one of the soldiers stalked into the room and reached for the horn. rand
did not know whether he should laugh, or not. the man wore armor, but his arrogant face seemed as
oblivious to their weapons as turak was.
mat put an end to it. as the seanchan reached out his hand, mat slashed it with the rubyhilted dagger.



with a curse, the soldier leaped back, looking surprised. and then he screamed. it chilled the room, held
everyone where they stood in astonishment. the trembling hand he held up in front of his face was turning
black, darkness creeping outwards from the bleeding gash that crossed his palm. he opened his mouth
wide and howled, clawing at his arm, then his shoulder. kicking, jerking, he toppled to the floor,
thrashing on the silken carpet, shrieking as his face grew black and his dark eyes bulged like overripe
plums, until a dark, swollen tongue gagged him. he twitched, choking raggedly, heels drumming, and did
not move again. every bit of his exposed flesh was black as putrid pitch and looked ready to burst at a
touch.
mat licked his lips and swallowed; his grip shifted uneasily on the dagger. even turak stared,
openmouthed.
you see, ingtar said softly, we are no easy meat. suddenly he leaped over the corpse, toward the
soldiers still goggling at what was left of the man who had stood at their shoulders only moments before.
shinowa! he cried. follow me! hurin leaped after him, and the soldiers fell back before them, the
sounds of steel on steel rising.
the seanchan at the other end of the room started forward as ingtar moved, but then they were falling
back, too, before mats thrusting dagger even more than from the axe perrin swung with wordless snarls.
in the space of heartbeats, rand stood alone, facing turak, who held his blade upright before him. his
moment of shock was gone. his eyes were sharp on rands face; the black and swollen body of one of
his soldiers might as well not have existed. it did not seem to exist for the two servants, either, any more
than rand and his sword existed, or the sounds of fighting, fading now from the rooms to either side out
into the house. the servants had begun calmly folding turaks robe as soon as the high lord took his
sword, and had not looked up even for the dead soldiers shrieks; now they knelt beside the door and
watched with impassive eyes.
i suspected it might come to you and me. turak spun his blade easily, a full circle one way, then the
other, his longnailed fingers moving delicately on the hilt. his fingernails did not seem to hamper him at
all. you are young. let us see what is required to earn the heron on this side of the ocean.
suddenly rand saw. standing tall on turaks blade was a heron. with the little training he had, he was
facetoface with a real blademaster. hastily he tossed the fleecelined cloak aside, ridding himself of
weight and encumbrance. turak waited.
rand desperately wanted to seek the void. it was plain he would need every shred of ability he could
muster, and even then his chances of leaving the room alive would be small. he had to leave alive.
egwene was almost close enough for him to shout to her, and he had to free her, somehow. butsaidin
waited in the void. the thought made his heart leap with eagerness at the same time that it turned his
stomach. but just as close as egwene were those other women.damane . if he touchedsaidin , and if he
could not stop himself channeling, they would know, verin had told him. know and wonder. so many,
so close. he might survive turak only to die facingdamane , and he could not die before egwene was
free. rand raised his blade.
turak glided toward him on silent feet. blade rang on blade like hammer on anvil.
from the first it was clear to rand that the man was testing him, pushing only hard enough to see what
he could do, then pushing a little harder, then just a little harder still. it was quick wrists and quick feet
that kept rand alive as much as skill. without the void, he was always half a heartbeat behind. the tip of
turaks heavy sword made a stinging trench just under his left eye. a flap of coat sleeve hung away from



his shoulder, the darker for being wet. under a neat slash beneath his right arm, precise as a tailors cut,
he could feel warm dampness spreading down his ribs.
there was disappointment on the high lords face. he stepped back with a gesture of disgust. where
did you find that blade, boy? or do they here truly award the heron to those no more skilled than you?
no matter. make your peace. it is time to die. he came on again.
the void enveloped rand.saidin flowed toward him, glowing with the promise of the one power, but
he ignored it. it was no more difficult than ignoring a barbed thorn twisting in his flesh. he refused to be
filled with the power, refused to be one with the male half of the true source. he was one with the
sword in his hands, one with the floor beneath his feet, one with the walls. one with turak.
he recognized the forms the high lord used; they were a little different from what he had been taught,
but not enough. the swallow takes flight met parting the silk. moon on the water met the wood
grouse dances. ribbon in the air met stones falling from the cliff. they moved about the room as in a
dance, and their music was steel against steel.
disappointment and disgust faded from turaks dark eyes, replaced by surprise, then concentration.
sweat appeared on the high lords face as he pressed rand harder. lightning of three prongs met leaf
on the breeze.
rands thoughts floated outside the void, apart from himself, hardly noticed. it was not enough. he
faced a blademaster, and with the void and every ounce of his skill he was barely managing to hold his
own. barely. he had to end it before turak finally did.saidin? no! sometimes it is necessary to
sheath the sword in your own flesh . but that would not help egwene, either. he had to end it now.
now.
turaks eyes widened as rand glided forward. so far he had only defended; now he attacked, all out.
the boar rushes down the mountain. every movement of his blade was an attempt to reach the high
lord; now all turak could do was retreat and defend, down the length of the room, almost to the door.
in an instant, while turak still tried to face the boar, rand charged. the river undercuts the bank. he
dropped to one knee, blade slashing across. he did not need turaks gasp, or the feel of resistance to
his cut to know. he heard two thumps and turned his head, knowing what he would see. he looked
down the length of his blade, wet and red, to where the high lord lay, sword tumbled from his limp
hand, a dark dampness staining the birds woven in the carpet under his body. turaks eyes were still
open, but already filmed with death.
the void shook. he had faced trollocs before, faced shadowspawn. never before had he confronted a
human being with a sword except in practice or bluff.i just killed a man . the void shook, andsaidin
tried to fill him.
desperately he clawed free, breathing hard as he looked around. he gave a start when he saw the two
servants still kneeling beside the door. he had forgotten them, and now he did not know what to do
about them. neither man appeared armed, yet all they had to do was shout . . .
they never looked at him, or at each other. instead, they stared silently at the high lords body. they
produced daggers from under their robes, and he tightened his grip on the sword, but each man placed
the point to his own breast. from birth to death, they intoned in unison, i serve the blood. and
plunged the daggers into their own hearts. they folded forward almost peacefully, heads to the floor as if
bowing deeply to their lord.



rand stared at them in disbelief.mad , he thought.maybe i will go mad, but they already were.
he was getting to his feet shakily when ingtar and the others came running back. they all bore nicks and
cuts; the leather of ingtars coat was stained in more than one place. mat still had the horn and his
dagger, its blade darker than the ruby in its hilt. perrins axe was red, too, and he looked as if he might
be sick at any moment.
you dealt with them? ingtar said, looking at the bodies. then were done, if no alarm is given. those
fools never cried for help, not once.
i will see if the guards heard anything, hurin said, and darted for the window.
mat shook his head. rand, these people are crazy. i know ive said that before, but these people really
are. those servants . . . rand held his breath, wondering if they had all killed themselves. mat said,
whenever they saw us fighting, they fell on their knees, put their faces to the floor, and wrapped their
arms around their heads. they never moved, or cried out; never tried to help the soldiers, or give an
alarm. theyre still there, as far as i know.
i would not count on them staying on their knees, ingtar said dryly. we are leaving now, as fast as we
can run.
you go, rand said. egwene  
you fool! ingtar snapped. we have what we came for. the horn of valere. the hope of salvation.
what can one girl count, even if you love her, alongside the horn, and what it stands for?
the dark one can have the horn for all i care! what does finding the horn count if i abandon egwene
to this? if i did that, the horn couldnt save me. the creator couldnt save me. i would damn myself.
ingtar stared at him, his face unreadable. you mean that exactly, dont you?
somethings happening out here, hurin said urgently. a man just came running up, and theyre all
milling like fish in a bucket. wait. the officer is coming inside!
go! ingtar said. he tried to take the horn, but mat was already running. rand hesitated, but ingtar
grabbed his arm and pulled him into the hall. the others were streaming after mat; perrin only gave rand
one pained look before he went. you cannot save the girl if you stand here and die!
he ran with them. part of him hated himself for running, but another part whispered,ill come back. ill
free her somehow.
by the time they reached the bottom of the narrow, winding staircase, he could hear a mans deep voice
raised in the front part of the house, angrily demanding that someone stand up and speak. a serving girl in
her nearly transparent robe knelt at the bottom of the stairs, and a grayhaired woman all in white wool,
with a long floury apron, knelt by the kitchen door. they were both exactly as mat had described, faces
to the floor and arms wrapped around their heads, and they did not stir a hair as rand and the others
hurried by. he was relieved to see the motions of breathing.
they crossed the garden at a dead run, climbing over the back wall rapidly. ingtar cursed when mat
tossed the horn of valere ahead of him, and tried again to take it when he dropped outside, but mat



snatched it up with a quick, it isnt even scratched, and scampered up the alley.
more shouts rose from the house they had just left; a woman screamed, and someone began tolling a
gong.
i will come back for her. somehow. rand sped after the others as fast as he could.

chapter 46

to come out of the shadow

nynaeve and the others heard distant shouts as they approached the buildings where thedamane were
housed. the crowds were beginning to pick up, and there was a nervousness to the people in the street,
an extra quickness to their step, an extra wariness in the way they glanced past nynaeve, in her
lightningpaneled dress, and the woman she held by a silver leash.
shifting her bundle nervously, elayne peered toward the noise of shouts, one street over, where the
golden hawk clutching lightning rippled in the wind. what is happening?
nothing to do with us, nynaeve said firmly.
you hope, min added. and so do i she increased her pace, hurrying up the steps ahead of the
others, and disappeared inside the tall stone house.
nynaeve shortened her grip on the leash. remember, seta, you want us to make it through this safely
as much as we do.
i do, the seanchan woman said fervently. she kept her chin on her chest, to hide her face. i will
cause you no trouble, i swear.
as they turned up the gray stone steps, asuldam and adamane appeared at the head of the stairs,
coming down as they went up. after one glance to make sure the woman in the collar was not egwene,
nynaeve did not look at them again. she used theadam to keep seta close by her side, so if the
damane sensed the ability to channel in one of them, she would think it was seta. she felt sweat trickling
down her spine, though, until she realized they were paying her no more attention than she gave them. all
they saw was a dress with lightning panels and a gray dress, the women wearing them linked by the silver
length of anadam . just another leash holder with a leashed one, and a local girl hurrying along
behind with a bundle belonging to thesuldam.



nynaeve pushed open the door, and they went in.
whatever the excitement beneath turaks banner, it did not extend here, not yet. there were only
women moving about in the entry hall, all easily placed by their dress. three graydresseddamane , with
suldam wearing the bracelets. two women in dresses paneled with forked lightning stood talking, and
three crossed the hall alone. four dressed like min, in plain dark woolens, hurried on their way with
trays.
min stood waiting down the entry hall when they went in; she glanced at them once, then started deeper
into the house. nynaeve guided seta down the hall after min, with elayne scurrying along in their wake.
no one gave them a second glance, it seemed to nynaeve, but she thought the trickle of sweat down her
backbone might become a river soon. she kept seta moving quickly so no one would have a chance for
a good look  or worse, a question. with her eyes fixed on her toes, seta needed so little urging that
nynaeve thought she would have been running if not for the physical restraint of the leash.
near the back of the house, min took a narrow stairs that spiraled upwards. nynaeve pushed seta up it
ahead of her, all the way to the fourth floor. the ceilings were low, there, the halls empty and silent
except for the soft sounds of weeping. weeping seemed to fit the air of the chilly halls.
this place . . . elayne began, then shook her head. it feels . . .
yes, it does, nynaeve said grimly. she glared at seta, who kept her face down. a pallor of fear made
the seanchan womans skin paler than it was normally.
wordlessly, min opened a door and went in, and they followed. the room beyond had been divided
into smaller rooms by roughly made wooden walls, with a narrow hallway running to a window. nynaeve
crowded after min as she hurried to the last door on the right and pushed in.
a slender, darkhaired girl in gray sat at a small table with her head resting on folded arms, but even
before she looked up, nynaeve knew it was egwene. a ribbon of shining metal ran from the silver collar
around egwenes neck to a bracelet hanging on a peg on the wall. her eyes widened at the sight of them,
her mouth working silently. as elayne closed the door, egwene gave a sudden giggle, and pressed her
hands to her mouth to stifle it. the tiny room was more than crowded with all of them in it.
i know im not dreaming, she said in a quivering voice, because if i was dreaming, youd be rand
and galad on tall stallions. i have been dreaming. i thought rand was here. i couldnt see him, but i
thought . . . her voice trailed off.
if youd rather wait for them . . . min said dryly.
oh, no. no, you are all beautiful, the most beautiful thing ive ever seen. where did you come from?
how did you do it? that dress, nynaeve, and theadam , and who is . . . she gave an abrupt squeak.
thats seta. how . . . ? her voice hardened so that nynaeve barely recognized it. id like to puther in
a pot of boiling water. seta had her eyes squeezed shut, and her hands clutched her skirts; she was
trembling.
what have they done to you? elayne exclaimed. what could they do to make you want something
like that?
egwene never took her eyes off the seanchan woman. id like to make her feel it. thats what she did
to me, made me feel like i was neck deep in . . . she shuddered. you do not know what it is like



wearing one of these, elayne. you dont know what they can do to you. i can never decide whether seta
is worse than renna, but theyre all hateful.
i think i know, nynaeve said quietly. she could feel the sweat soaking setas skin, the cold tremors
that shook her limbs: the yellowhaired seanchan was terrified. it was all she could do not to make
setas terrors come true then and there.
can you take this off of me? egwene asked, touching the collar. you must be able to if you could put
that one on  
nynaeve channeled, a pinpoint trickle. the collar on egwenes neck provided anger enough, and if it
had not, setas fear, the knowledge of how deserved it truly was, and her own knowledge of what she
wanted to do to the woman, would have done it. the collar sprang open and fell away from egwenes
throat. with an expression of wonder, egwene touched her neck.
put on my dress and coat, nynaeve told her. elayne was already unbundling the clothes on the bed.
we will walk out of here, and no one will even notice you. she considered holding her contact with
saidar  she was certainly angry enough, and it felt so wonderful  but, reluctantly, she let it go. this
was the one place in falme where there was no chance of asuldam anddamane coming to investigate if
they sensed someone channeling, but they would certainly do so if adamane saw a woman she thought
was asuldam with the glow of channeling around her. i dont know why you arent gone already.
alone here, even if you could not figure out how to get that thing off you, you could have just picked it up
and run.
as min and elayne hurriedly helped her change into nynaeves old dress, egwene explained about
moving the bracelet from where asuldam left it, and how channeling made her sick unless asuldam
wore the bracelet. just that morning she had discovered how the collar could be opened without the
power  and found that touching the catch with the intention of opening it made her hand knot into
uselessness. she could touch it as much as she wanted so long as she did not think of undoing the catch;
the merest hint of that, though, and . . .
nynaeve felt sick herself. the bracelet on her wrist made her sick. it was too horrible. she wanted it off
her wrist before she learned more aboutadam , before she perhaps learned something that would make
her feel soiled forever for having worn it.
unfastening the silver cuff, she pulled it loose, snapped it closed, and hung it on one of the pegs. dont
think that means you can shout for help now. she shook a fist under setas nose. i can still make you
wish you were never born if you open your mouth, and i do not need that bloody . . . thing.
you  you do not mean to leave me here with it, seta said in a whisper. you cannot. tie me. gag
me so i cannot give an alarm. please!
egwene gave a mirthless laugh. leave it on her. she wont call for help even without a gag. you had
better hope whoever finds you will remove theadam and keep your little secret, seta. your dirty secret,
isnt it?
what are you talking about? elayne said.
i have thought about it a great deal, egwene said. thinking was all i could do when they left me alone
up here.suldam claim they develop an affinity after a few years. most of them can tell when a woman is
channeling whether theyre leashed to her or not. i wasnt sure, but seta proves it.



proves what? elayne demanded, and then her eyes widened in sudden realization, but egwene went
on.
nynaeve,adam only work on women who can channel. dont you see?suldam can channel the same
asdamane . seta groaned through her teeth, shaking her head in violent denial. asuldam would die
before admitting she could channel, even if she knew, and they never train the ability, so they cannot do
anything with it, but they can channel.
i told you, min said. that collar shouldnt have worked on her. she was doing up the last buttons
down egwenes back. any woman who couldnt channel would be able to beat you silly while you tried
to control her with it.
how can that be? nynaeve said. i thought the seanchan put leashes on any woman who can
channel.
all of those they find, egwene told her. but those they can find are like you, and me, and elayne. we
were born with it, ready to channel whether anyone taught us or not. but what about seanchan girls who
arent born with the ability, but who could be taught? not just any woman can become a  a leash
holder. renna thought she was being friendly telling me about it. it is apparently a feastday in seanchan
villages when thesuldam come to test the girls. they want to find any like you and me, and leash them,
but they let all the others put on a bracelet to see if they can feel what the poor woman in the collar feels.
those who can are taken away to be trained assuldam . they are the women who could be taught.
seta was moaning under her breath. no. no. no. over and over again.
i know she is horrible, elayne said, but i feel as if i should help her somehow. she could be one of
our sisters, only the seanchan have twisted it all.
nynaeve opened her mouth to say they had better worry about helping themselves, and the door
opened.
what is going on here? renna demanded, stepping into the room. an audience? she stared at
nynaeve, hands on hips. i never gave permission for anyone else to link with my pet, tuli. i do not even
know who you   her eyes fell on egwene  egwene wearing nynaeves dress instead ofdamane
gray. egwene with no collar around her throat  and her eyes grew as big as saucers. she never had a
chance to yell.
before anyone else could move, egwene snatched the pitcher from her washstand and smashed it into
rennas midriff. the pitcher shattered, and thesuldam lost all her breath in a gurgling gasp and doubled
over. as she fell, egwene leaped on her with a snarl, shoving her flat, grabbing for the collar she had
worn where it still lay on the floor, snapping it around the other womans neck. with one jerk on the
silver leash, egwene pulled the bracelet from the peg and fitted it to her own wrist. her lips were pulled
back from her teeth, her eyes fixed on rennas face with a terrible concentration. kneeling on the
suldam s shoulders, she pressed both hands over the womans mouth. renna gave a tremendous
convulsion, and her eyes bulged in her face; hoarse sounds came from her throat, screams held back by
egwenes hands; her heels drummed on the floor.
stop it, egwene! nynaeve grabbed egwenes shoulders, pulling her off of the other woman. egwene,
stop it! that isnt what you want! renna lay grayfaced and panting, staring wildly at the ceiling.



suddenly egwene threw herself against nynaeve, sobbing raggedly at her breast. she hurt me,
nynaeve. she hurt me. they all did. they hurt me, and hurt me, until i did what they wanted. i hate them.
i hate them for hurting me, and i hate them because i couldnt stop them from making me do what they
wanted.
i know, nynaeve said gently. she smoothed egwenes hair. it is all right to hate them, egwene. it is.
they deserve it. but it isnt all right to let them make you like they are.
setas hands were pressed to her face. renna touched the collar at her throat disbelievingly, with a
shaking hand.
egwene straightened, brushing her tears away quickly. im not. i am not like them. she almost clawed
the bracelet off of her wrist and threw it down. im not. but i wish i could kill them.
they deserve it. min was staring grimly at the twosuldam.
rand would kill someone who did a thing like that, elayne said. she seemed to be steeling herself. i
am sure he would.
perhaps they do, nynaeve said, and perhaps he would. but men often mistake revenge and killing for
justice. they seldom have the stomach for justice. she had often sat in judgment with the womens
circle. sometimes men came before them, thinking women might give them a better hearing than the men
of the village council, but men always thought they could sway the decision with eloquence, or pleas for
mercy. the womens circle gave mercy where it was deserved, but justice always, and it was the
wisdom who pronounced it. she picked up the bracelet egwene had discarded and closed it. i would
free every woman here, if i could, and destroy every last one of these. but since i cannot . . . she
slipped the bracelet over the same peg that held the other one, then addressed herself to thesuldam .
not leash holders any longer , she told herself. perhaps, if you are very quiet, you will be left alone
here long enough to manage to remove the collars. the wheel weaves as the wheel wills, and it may be
that youve done enough good to counterbalance the evil you have done, enough that you will be allowed
to remove them. if not, you will be found, eventually. and i think whoever finds you will ask a great
many questions before they remove those collars. i think perhaps you will learn at first hand the life you
have given to other women. that is justice, she added, to the others.
renna wore a fixed stare of horror. setas shoulders shook as she sobbed into her hands. nynaeve
hardened her heart it is justice , she told herself.it is  and herded the others out of the room.
no one paid any more attention to them going out than they had coming in. nynaeve supposed she had
thesuldam dress to thank for that, but she could not wait to change into something else. anything else.
the dirtiest rag would feel cleaner on her skin.
the girls were silent, walking close behind her, until they were out on the cobblestone street again. she
did not know if it was what she had done or the fear that someone might stop them. she scowled. would
they have felt better if she had let them work themselves up to cutting the womens throats?
horses, egwene said. we will need horses. i know the stable where they took bela, but i dont think
we can get to her.
we have to leave bela here, nynaeve told her. we are leaving by ship.
where is everybody? min said, and suddenly nynaeve realized the street was empty.



the crowds were gone, not a sign of them to be seen; every shop and window along the street were
shuttered tight. but up the street from the harbor came a formation of seanchan soldiers, a hundred or
more in ordered ranks, with an officer at their head in his painted armor. they were still halfway down
the street from the women, but they marched with a grim, implacable step, and it seemed to nynaeve that
every eye was fixed on her.thats ridiculous. i cant see their eyes inside those helmets, and if
anybody had given an alarm, it would be behind us . she stopped anyway.
there are more behind us, min murmured. nynaeve could hear those boots, now. i dont know
which will reach us first.
nynaeve took a deep breath. they are nothing to do with us. she looked beyond the approaching
soldiers, to the harbor, filled with tall, boxy seanchan ships. she could not make outspray ; she prayed it
was still there, and ready. we will walk right past them.light, i hope we can.
what if they want you to join them, nynaeve? elayne asked. you are wearing that dress. if they start
asking questions . . .
i will not go back, egwene said grimly. ill die first. let me show them what theyve taught me. to
nynaeves eye, a golden nimbus suddenly seemed to surround her.
no! she said, but it was too late.
with a roar like thunder, the street under the first ranks of seanchan erupted, dirt and cobblestones and
armored men thrown aside like spray from a fountain. still glowing, egwene spun to stare up the street,
and the thunderous roar was repeated. dirt rained down on the women. shouting seanchan soldiers
scattered in good order to shelter in alleys and behind stoops. in moments they were all out of sight,
except for those who lay around the two large holes marring the street. some of those stirred feebly, and
moans drifted along the street.
nynaeve threw up her hands, trying to look in both directions at once. you fool! we are trying not to
attract attention! there was no hope of that now. she only hoped they could manage to work their way
around the soldiers to the harbor through the alleys.the damanemust know, too, now. they could not
have missed that.
i wont go back to that collar, egwene said fiercely. i wont!
look out! min shouted.
with a shrill whine, a fireball as big as a horse arched into the air over the rooftops and began to fall.
directly toward them.
run! nynaeve shouted, and threw herself into a dive toward the nearest alleyway, between two
shuttered shops.
she landed awkwardly on her stomach with a grunt, losing half her breath, as the fireball struck. hot
wind washed over her down the narrow passage. gulping air, she rolled onto her back and stared back
into the street.
the cobblestones where they had been standing were chipped and cracked and blackened in a circle
ten paces across. elayne was crouched just inside another alley on the other side of the street. of min



and egwene, there was no sign. nynaeve clapped a hand to her mouth in horror.
elayne seemed to understand what she was thinking. the daughterheir shook her head violently and
pointed down the street. they had gone that way.
nynaeve heaved a sigh of relief that immediately turned to a growl.fool girl! we could have gotten by
them! there was no time for recriminations, though. she scooted to the corner and peered cautiously
around the edge of the building.
a headsized fireball flashed down the street toward her. she leaped back just before it exploded
against the corner where her own head had been, showering her with stone chips.
anger had her awash in the one power before she was aware of it. lightning flashed out of the sky,
striking somewhere up the street with a crash near the origin of the fireball. another jagged bolt split the
sky, and then she was running down the alley. behind her, lightning lanced the mouth of the alley.
if domon doesnt have that ship waiting, ill. . .light, let us all reach it safely.

bayle domon jerked erect as lightning streaked across the slategray sky, striking somewhere in the
town, then again.there do no be enough clouds for that!
something rumbled loudly up in the town, and a ball of fire smashed into a rooftop just above the docks,
throwing splintered slates in wide arcs. the docks had emptied themselves of people a while back,
except for a few seanchan; they ran wildly, now, drawing swords and shouting. a man appeared from
one of the warehouses with agrolm at his side, running to keep up with the beasts long leaps as they
vanished into one of the streets leading up from the water.
one of domons crewmen jumped for an axe and swung it high over a mooring cable.
in two strides, domon seized the upraised axe with one hand and the mans throat with the other. 
spraydo stay tilli do say sail, aedwin cole!
theyre going mad, captain! yarin shouted. an explosion sent echoes rumbling across the harbor,
sending the gulls into screaming circles, and lightning flickered again, crashing to earth inside falme. the
damane will kill us all! let us go while theyre busy killing one another. they will never notice us till we
are gone!
i did give my word, domon said. he wrenched the axe from coles hand and threw it clattering onto
the deck. i did give my word.hurry, woman , he thought,aes sedai or whatever you be. hurry!

geofram bornhald eyed the lightning flashing over falme and dismissed it from his mind. some huge
flying creature  one of the seanchan monsters, no doubt  flew wildly to escape the bolts. if there
was a storm, it would hinder the seanchan as much as it did him. nearly treeless hills, a few topped by
sparse thickets, still hid the town from him, and him from it.
his thousand men lay spread out to either side of him, one long, mounted rank rippling along the hollows
between hills. the cold wind tossed their white cloaks and flapped the banner at bornhalds side, the



wavyrayed golden sun of the children of the light.
go now, byar, he commanded. the gauntfaced man hesitated, and bornhald put a snap into his
voice. i said, go, child byar!
byar touched hand to heart and bowed. as you command, my lord captain. he turned his horse
away, every line of him shouting reluctance.
bornhald put byar out of his mind. he had done what he could, there. he raised his voice. the legion
will advance at a walk!
with a creak of saddles the long line of whitecloaked men moved slowly toward falme.

rand peered around the corner at the approaching seanchan, then ducked back into the narrow alley
between two stables with a grimace. they would be there soon. there was blood crusted on his cheek.
the cuts he had from turak burned, but there was nothing to be done for them now. lightning flashed
across the sky again; he felt the rumble of its plummet through his boots.what in the name of the light
is happening?
close? ingtar said. the horn of valere must be saved, rand. despite the seanchan, despite the
lightning and strange explosions down in the town proper, he seemed preoccupied with his own thoughts.
mat and perrin and hurin were down at the other end of the alley, watching another seanchan patrol.
the place where they had left the horses was close, now, if they could only reach it.
shes in trouble, rand muttered. egwene. there was an odd feeling in his head, as if pieces of his life
were in danger. egwene was one piece, one thread of the cord that made his life, but there were others,
and he could feel them threatened. down there, in falme. and if any of those threads was destroyed, his
life would never be complete, the way it was meant to be. he did not understand it, but the feeling was
sure and certain.
one man could hold fifty here, ingtar said. the two stables stood close together, with barely room for
the pair of them to stand side by side between them. one man holding fifty at a narrow passage. not a
bad way to die. songs have been made about less.
theres no need for that, rand said. i hope. a rooftop in the town exploded.how am i going to
get back in here? i have to reach her. reach them? shaking his head, he peeked around the corner
again. the seanchan were closer, still coming.
i never knew what he was going to do, ingtar said softly, as if talking to himself. he had his sword out,
testing the edge with his thumb. a pale little man you didnt seem to really notice even when you were
looking at him. take him inside fal dara, i was told, inside the fortress. i did not want to, but i had to do
it. you understand? i had to. i never knew what he intended until he shot that arrow. i still dont know if
it was meant for the amyrlin, or for you.
rand felt a chill. he stared at ingtar. what are you saying? he whispered.
studying his blade, ingtar did not seem to hear. humankind is being swept away everywhere. nations
fail and vanish. darkfriends are everywhere, and none of these southlanders seem to notice or care. we
fight to hold the borderlands, to keep them safe in their houses, and every year, despite all we can do,



the blight advances. and these southlanders think trollocs are myths, and myrddraal a gleemans tale.
he frowned and shook his head. it seemed the only way. we would be destroyed for nothing,
defending people who do not even know, or care. it seemed logical. why should we be destroyed for
them, when we could make our own peace? better the shadow, i thought, than useless oblivion, like
carallain, or hardan, or . . . it seemed so logical, then.
rand grabbed ingtars lapels. you arent making any sense.he cant mean what hes saying. he
cant . say it plain, whatever you mean. you are talking crazy!
for the first time ingtar looked at rand. his eyes shone with unshed tears. you are a better man than i.
shepherd or lord, a better man. the prophecy says, let who sounds me think not of glory, but only
salvation. it was my salvation i was thinking of. i would sound the horn, and lead the heroes of the
ages against shayol ghul. surely that would have been enough to save me. no man can walk so long in
the shadow that he cannot come again to the light. that is what they say. surely that would have been
enough to wash away what i have been, and done.
oh, light, ingtar. rand released his hold on the other man and sagged back against the stable wall. i
think. . . i think wanting to is enough. i think all you have to do is stop being . . . one of them. ingtar
flinched as if rand had said it out. darkfriend.
rand, when verin brought us here with the portal stone, i  i lived other lives. sometimes i held the
horn, but i never sounded it. i tried to escape what id become, but i never did. always there was
something else required of me, always something worse than the last, until i was . . . you were ready to
give it up to save a friend. think not of glory. oh, light, help me.
rand did not know what to say. it was as if egwene had told him she had murdered children. too
horrible to be believed. too horrible for anyone to admit to unless it was true. too horrible.
after a time, ingtar spoke again, firmly. there has to be a price, rand. there is always a price. perhaps
i can pay it here.
ingtar, i  
it is every mans right, rand, to choose when to sheathe the sword. even one like me.
before rand could say anything, hurin came running down the alley. the patrol turned aside, he said
hurriedly, down into the town. they seem to be gathering down there. mat and perrin went on. he
took a quick look down the street and pulled back. wed better do the same, lord ingtar, lord rand.
those bugheaded seanchan are almost here.
go, rand, ingtar said. he turned to face the street and did not look at rand or hurin again. take the
horn where it belongs. i always knew the amyrlin should have given you the charge. but all i ever
wanted was to keep shienar whole, to keep us from being swept away and forgotten.
i know, ingtar. rand drew a deep breath. the light shine on you, lord ingtar of house shinowa,
and may you shelter in the palm of the creators hand. he touched ingtars shoulder. the last embrace
of the mother welcome you home. hurin gasped.
thank you, ingtar said softly. a tension seemed to go out of him. for the first time since the night of
the trolloc raid on fal dara, he stood as he had when rand first saw him, confident and relaxed.
content.



rand turned and found hurin staring at him, staring at both of them. it is time for us to go.
but lord ingtar  
  does what he has to, rand said sharply. but we go. hurin nodded, and rand trotted after him.
rand could hear the steady tread of the seanchans boots, now. he did not look back.

chapter 47

the grave is no bar to my call

mat and perrin were mounted by the time rand and hurin reached them. far behind him, rand heard
ingtars voice rise. the light, and shinowa! the clash of steel joined the roar of other voices.
wheres ingtar? mat shouted. whats going on? he had the horn of valere lashed to the high
pommel of his saddle as if it were just any horn, but the dagger was in his belt, the rubytipped hilt
cupped protectively in a pale hand that seemed made of nothing but bone and sinew.
hes dying, rand said harshly as he swung onto reds back.
then we have to help him, perrin said. mat can take the horn and the dagger on to  
he is doing it so we can all get away, rand said.for that, too . we will all take the horn to verin,
and then you can help her take it wherever she says it belongs.
what do you mean? perrin asked. rand dug his heels into the bays flanks, and red leaped away
toward the hills beyond the town.
the light, and shinowa! ingtars shout soared after him, sounding triumphant, and lightning crashed
across the sky in answer.
rand whipped red with his reins, then lay against the stallions neck as the bay laid out in a dead run,
mane and tail streaming. he wished he did not feel as if he were running away from ingtars cry, running
from what he was supposed to do.ingtar, a darkfriend. i dont care. he was still my friend . the
bays gallop could not take him away from his own thoughts.death is lighter than a feather, duty
heavier than a mountain. so many duties. egwene. the horn. fain. mat and his dagger. why
cant there just be one at a time? i have to take care of all of them. oh, light, egwene!



he reined in so suddenly that red slid to a halt, sitting back on his haunches. they were in a scanty
copse of barebranched trees atop one of the hills overlooking falme. the others galloped up behind
him.
what do you mean? perrin demanded. we can help verin take the horn where its supposed to go?
where are you going to be?
maybe hes going mad already, mat said. he wouldnt want to stay with us if he was going mad.
would you, rand?
you three take the horn to verin, rand said.egwene. so many threads, in so much danger. so
many duties . you do not need me.
mat caressed the daggers hilt. thats all very well, but what about you? burn me, you cant be going
mad yet. you cant! hurin gaped at them, not understanding half of it.
im going back, rand said. i should never have left. somehow, that did not sound exactly right in his
own ears; it did not feel right inside his head. i have to go back. now. that sounded better. egwene is
still there, remember. with one of those collars around her neck.
are you sure? mat said. i never saw her. aaaah! if you say she is there, then shes there. well all
take the horn to verin, and then we will all go back for her. you dont think i would leave her there, do
you?
rand shook his head.threads. duties . he felt as if he were about to explode like a firework.light,
whats happening to me? mat, verin must take you and that dagger to tar valon, so you can finally
be free of it. you dont have any time to waste.
saving egwene isnt wasting time! but mats hand had tightened on the dagger till it shook.
we arent any of us going back, perrin said. not yet. look. he pointed back toward falme.
the wagon yards and horse lots were turning black with seanchan soldiers, thousands of them rank on
rank, with troops of cavalry riding scaled beasts as well as armored men on horses, colorful gonfanons
marking the officers.grolm dotted the ranks, and other strange creatures, almost but not quite like
monstrous birds and lizards, and great things like nothing he could describe, with gray, wrinkled skin and
huge tusks. at intervals along the lines stoodsuldam anddamane by the score. rand wondered if
egwene were one of them. in the town behind the soldiers, a rooftop still exploded now and again, and
lightning still streaked the sky. two flying beasts, with leathery wings twenty spans tip to tip, soared high
overhead, keeping well away from where the bright bolts danced.
all that for us? mat said incredulously. who do they think we are?
an answer came to rand, but he shoved it away before it had a chance to form completely.
we arent going the other way either, lord rand, hurin said. whitecloaks. hundreds of them.
rand wheeled his horse to look where the sniffer was pointing. a long, whitecloaked line rippled slowly
toward them across the hills.
lord rand, hurin muttered, if that lot lays an eye on the horn of valere, well never get it close to an



aes sedai. well never get close to it again ourselves.
maybe thats why the seanchan are gathering, mat said hopefully. because of the whitecloaks.
maybe it doesnt have anything to do with us at all.
whether it does or not, perrin said dryly, there is going to be a battle here in a few minutes.
either side could kill us, hurin said, even if they never see the horn. if they do . . .
rand could not manage to think about the whitecloaks, or the seanchan.i have to go back. have to .
he was staring at the horn of valere, he realized. they all were. the curled, golden horn hung at mats
pommel, the focus of every eye.
it has to be there at the last battle, mat said, licking his lips. nothing says it cant be used before
then. he pulled the horn free of its lashings and looked at them anxiously. nothing says it cant.
no one else said anything. rand did not think he could speak; his own thoughts were too urgent to allow
room for speech.have to go back. have to go back . the longer he looked at the horn, the more
urgent his thoughts became.have to. have t o.
mats hand shook as he raised the horn of valere to his lips.
it was a clear note, golden as the horn was golden. the trees around them seemed to resonate with it,
and the ground under their feet, the sky overhead. that one long sound encompassed everything.
out of nowhere, a fog began to rise. first thin wisps hanging in the air, then thicker billows, and thicker,
until it blanketed the land like clouds.
geofram bornhald stiffened in his saddle as a sound filled the air, so sweet he wanted to laugh, so
mournful he wanted to cry. it seemed to come from every direction at once. a mist began to rise,
growing even as he watched.
the seanchan. they are trying something. they know we are here.
it was too soon, the town too far, but he drew his sword  a clatter of scabbards ran down the rank of
his half legion  and called, the legion will advance at a trot.
the fog covered everything, now, but he knew falme was still there, ahead. the pace of the horses
picked up; he could not see them, but he could hear.
abruptly the ground ahead flew up with a roar, showering him with dirt and pebbles. from the white
blindness to his right he heard another roar, and men and horses screamed, then from his left, and again.
again. thunder and screams, hidden by the fog.
the legion will charge! his horse leaped forward as he dug in his heels, and he heard the roar as the
legion, as much of it as still lived, followed.
thunder and screams, wrapped in whiteness.
his last thought was regret. byar would not be able to tell his son dain how he had died.



rand could not see the trees around them any longer. mat had lowered the horn, eyes wide with awe,
but the sound of it still rang in rands ears. the fog hid everything in rolling waves as white as the finest
bleached wool, yet rand could see. he could see, but it was mad. falme floated somewhere beneath
him, its landward border black with the seanchan ranks, lightning ripping its streets. falme hung over his
head. there whitecloaks charged and died as the earth opened in fire beneath their horses hooves.
there men ran about the decks of tall, square ships in the harbor, and on one ship, a familiar ship, fearful
men waited. he could even recognize the face of the captain. bayle domon. he clutched his head with
both hands. the trees were hidden, but he could still see each of the others clearly. hurin anxious. mat
muttering, fearful. perrin looking as if he knew this was meant to be. the fog roiled up all around them.
hurin gasped. lord rand! there was no need for him to point.
down the billowing fog, as if it were the side of a mountain, rode shapes on horses. at first the dense
mists hid more than that, but slowly they came closer, and it was rands turn to gasp. he knew them.
men, not all in armor, and women. their clothes and their weapons came from every age, but he knew
them all.
rogosh eagleeye, a fatherly looking man with white hair and eyes so sharp as to make his name merely
a hint. gaidal cain, a swarthy man with the hilts of his two swords sticking above his broad shoulders.
goldenhaired birgitte, with her gleaming silver bow and quiver bristling with silver arrows. more. he
knew their faces, knew their names. but he heard a hundred names when he looked at each face, some
so different he did not recognize them as names at all, though he knew they were. michael instead of
mikel. patrick instead of paedrig. oscar instead of otarin.
he knew the man who rode at their head, too. tall and hooknosed, with dark, deepset eyes, his great
sword justice at his side. artur hawkwing.
mat gaped at them as they reined in before him and the others. is this . . . ? is this all of you? they
were little more than a hundred, rand saw, and realized that somehow he had known that they would be.
hurins mouth hung open; his eyes bulged almost out of his head.
it takes more than bravery to bind a man to the horn. artur hawkwings voice was deep and
carrying, a voice used to giving commands.
or a woman, birgitte said sharply.
or a woman, hawkwing agreed. only a few are bound to the wheel, spun out again and again to
work the will of the wheel in the pattern of the ages. you could tell him, lews therin, could you but
remember when you wore flesh. he was looking at rand.
rand shook his head, but he would not waste time with denials. invaders have come, men who call
themselves seanchan, who use chained aes sedai in battle. they must be driven back into the sea. and
 and there is a girl. egwene alvere. a novice from the white tower. the seanchan have her
prisoner. you must help me free her.
to his surprise, several of the small host behind artur hawkwing chuckled, and birgitte, testing her
bowstring, laughed. you always choose women who cause you trouble, lews therin. it had a fond
sound, as between old friends.
my name is rand althor, he snapped. you have to hurry. there isnt much time.



time? birgitte said, smiling. we have all of time. gaidal cain dropped his reins and, guiding his
horse with his knees, drew a sword in either hand. all along the small band of heroes there was an
unsheathing of swords, an unlimbering of bows, a hefting of spears and axes.
justice shone like a mirror in artur hawkwings gauntleted fist. i have fought by your side times beyond
number, lews therin, and faced you as many more. the wheel spins us out for its purposes, not ours, to
serve the pattern. i know you, if you do not know yourself. we will drive these invaders out for you.
his warhorse pranced, and he looked around, frowning. something is wrong here. something holds
me. suddenly he turned his sharpeyed gaze on rand. you are here. have you the banner? a murmur
ran through those behind him.
yes. rand tore open the straps of his saddlebags and pulled out the dragons banner. it filled his
hands and hung almost to his stallions knees. the murmur among the heroes rose.
the pattern weaves itself around our necks like halters, artur hawkwing said. you are here. the
banner is here. the weave of this moment is set. we have come to the horn, but we must follow the
banner. and the dragon. hurin made a faint sound as if his throat had seized.
burn me, mat breathed. its true. burn me!
perrin hesitated only an instant before swinging down off his horse and striding into the mist. there came
a chopping sound, and when he returned, he carried a straight length of sapling shorn of its branches.
give it to me, rand, he said gravely. if they need it . . . give it to me.
hastily, rand helped him tie the banner to the pole. when perrin remounted, pole in hand, a current of
air seemed to ripple the pale length of the banner, so the serpentine dragon appeared to move, alive. the
wind did not touch the heavy fog, only the banner.
you stay here, rand told hurin. when its over . . . you will be safe, here.
hurin drew his short sword, holding it as if it might actually be of some use from horseback. begging
your pardon, lord rand, but i think not. i dont understand the tenth part of what ive heard . . . or what
im seeing  his voice dropped to a mutter before picking up again  but ive come this far, and i
think ill go the rest of the way.
artur hawkwing clapped the sniffer on the shoulder. sometimes the wheel adds to our number, friend.
perhaps you will find yourself among us, one day. hurin sat up as if he had been offered a crown.
hawkwing bowed formally from his saddle to rand. with your permission . . . lord rand. trumpeter,
will you give us music on the horn? fitting that the horn of valere should sing us into battle. bannerman,
will you advance?
mat sounded the horn again, long and high  the mists rang with it  and perrin heeled his horse
forward. rand drew the heronmark blade and rode between them.
he could see nothing but thick billows of white, but somehow he could still see what he had before, too.
falme, where someone used the power in the streets, and the harbor, and the seanchan host, and the
dying whitecloaks, all of it beneath him, all of him hanging above, all of it just as it had been. it seemed as
if no time at all had passed since the horn was first blown, as though time had paused while the heroes
answered the call and now resumed counting.
the wild cries mat wrung from the horn echoed in the fog, and the drumming of hooves as the horses



picked up speed. rand charged into the mists, wondering if he knew where he was headed. the clouds
thickened, hiding the far ends of the rank of heroes galloping to either side of him, obscuring more and
more, till he could see only mat and perrin and hurin clearly. hurin crouched low in his saddle,
wideeyed, urging his horse on. mat sounding the horn, and laughing between. perrin, his yellow eyes
glowing, the dragons banner streaming behind him. then they were gone, too, and rand rode on alone,
as it seemed.
in a way, he could still see them, but now it was the way he could see falme, and the seanchan. he
could not tell where they were, or where he was. he tightened his grip on his sword, peered into the
mists ahead. he charged alone through the fog, and somehow he knew that was how it was meant to be.
suddenly baalzamon was before him in the mists, throwing his arms wide.
red reared wildly, hurling rand from his saddle. rand clung to his sword desperately as he soared. it
was not a hard landing. in fact, he thought with a sense of wonder that it was very much like landing on . .
. nothing at all. one instant he was sailing through the mists, and the next he was not.
when he climbed to his feet, his horse was gone, but baalzamon was still there, striding toward him
with a long, blackcharred staff in his hands. they were alone, only they and the rolling fog. behind
baalzamon was shadow. the mist was not dark behind him; this blackness excluded the white fog.
rand was aware of the other things, too. artur hawkwing and the other heroes meeting the seanchan in
dense fog. perrin, with the banner, swinging his axe more to fend off those who tried to reach him than
harm them. mat, still blowing wild notes on the horn of valere. hurin down from his saddle, fighting with
short sword and swordbreaker in the way he knew. it seemed as if the seanchan numbers would
overwhelm them in one rush, yet it was the darkarmored seanchan who fell back.
rand went forward to meet baalzamon. reluctantly, he assumed the void, reached for the true source,
was filled with the one power. there was no other way. perhaps he had no chance against the dark
one, but whatever chance he did have lay in the power. it soaked into his limbs, seemed to suffuse
everything about him, his clothes, his sword. he felt as if he should be glowing like the sun. it thrilled him;
it made him want to vomit.
get out of my way, he grated. i am not here for you!
the girl? baalzamon laughed. his mouth turned to flame. his burns were all but healed, leaving only a
few pink scars that were already fading. he looked like a handsome man of middle years. except for his
mouth, and his eyes. which one, lews therin? you will not have anyone to help you this time. you are
mine, or you are dead. in which case, you are mine anyway.
liar! rand snarled. he struck at baalzamon, but the staff of charred wood turned his blade in a
shower of sparks. father of lies!
fool! did those other fools you summoned not tell you who you are? the fires of baalzamons face
roared with laughter.
even floating in emptiness, rand felt a chill.would they have lied? i dont wantto be the dragon
reborn . he firmed his grip on his sword. parting the silk, but baalzamon beat every cut aside; sparks
flew as from a blacksmiths forge and hammer. i have business in falme, and none with you. never with
you, rand said.i have to hold his attention until they can free egwene . in that odd way, he could
see the battle rage among the fogshrouded wagon yards and horse lots.



you pitiful wretch. you have sounded the horn of valere. you are linked to it, now. do you think the
worms of the white tower will ever release you, now? they will put chains around your neck so heavy
you will never cut them.
rand was so surprised he felt it inside the void.he doesnt know everything. he doesnt know! he
was sure it must show on his face. to cover it, he rushed at baalzamon. hummingbird kisses the
honeyrose. the moon on the water. the swallow rides the air. lightning arched between sword and
staff. coruscating glitter showered the fog. yet baalzamon fell back, his eyes blazing in furious furnaces.
at the edge of his awareness, rand saw the seanchan falling back in the streets of falme, fighting
desperately.damane tore the earth with the one power, but it could not harm artur hawkwing, nor the
other heroes of the horn.
will you remain a slug beneath a rock? baalzamon snarled. the darkness behind him boiled and
stirred. you kill yourself while we stand here. the power rages in you. it burns you. it is killing you! i
alone in all the world can teach you how to control it. serve me, and live. serve me, or die!
never!have to hold him long enough. hurry, hawkwing. hurry! he launched himself at
baalzamon again. the dove takes flight. the falling leaf.
this time it was he who was driven back. dimly, he saw the seanchan fighting their way back in among
the stables. he redoubled his efforts. the kingfisher takes a silverback. the seanchan gave way to a
charge, artur hawkwing and perrin side by side in the van. bundling straw. baalzamon caught his blow
in a fountain like crimson fireflies, and he had to leap away before the staff split his head; the wind of the
blow ruffled his hair. the seanchan surged forward. striking the spark. sparks flew like hail,
baalzamon jumped from his stroke, and the seanchan were driven back to the cobblestone streets.
rand wanted to howl aloud. suddenly he knew that the two battles were linked. when he advanced, the
heroes called by the horn drove the seanchan back; when he fell back, the seanchan rose up.
they will not save you, baalzamon said. those who might save you will be carried far across the
aryth ocean. if ever you see them again, they will be collared slaves, and they will destroy you for their
new masters.
egwene. i cant let them do that to her.
baalzamons voice rode over his thoughts. you have only one salvation, rand althor. lews therin
kinslayer. i am your only salvation. serve me, and i will give you the world. resist, and i will destroy
you as i have so often before. but this time i will destroy you to your very soul, destroy you utterly and
forever.
i have won again, lews therin. the thought was beyond the void, yet it took an effort to ignore it, not
to think of all the lives where he had heard it. he shifted his sword, and baalzamon readied his staff.
for the first time rand realized that baalzamon acted as if the heronmark blade could harm him.steel
cant hurt the dark on e. but baalzamon watched the sword warily. rand was one with the sword.
he could feel every particle of it, tiny bits a thousand times too small to be seen with the eye. and he
could feel the power that suffused him running into the sword, as well, threading through the intricate
matrices wrought by aes sedai during the trolloc wars.



it was another voice he heard then. lans voice.there will come a time when you want something
more than you want life . ingtars voice.it is every mans right to choose when to sheathe the
sword . the picture formed of egwene, collared, living her life as adamane .threads of my life in
danger. egwene. if hawking gets into falme, he can save her . before he knew it, he had taken the
first position of heron wading in the rushes, balanced on one foot, sword raised high, open and
defenseless.death is lighter than a feather, duty heavier than a mountain.
baalzamon stared at him. why are you grinning like an idiot, fool? do you not know i can destroy you
utterly?
rand felt a calmness beyond that of the void. i will never serve you, father of lies. in a thousand lives,
i never have. i know that. im sure of it. come. it is time to die.
baalzamons eyes widened; for an instant they were furnaces that put sweat on rands face. the
blackness behind baalzamon boiled up around him, and his face hardened. then die, worm! he struck
with the staff, as with a spear.
rand screamed as he felt it pierce his side, burning like a whitehot poker. the void trembled, but he
held on with the last of his strength, and drove the heronmark blade into baalzamons heart.
baalzamon screamed, and the dark behind him screamed. the world exploded in fire.

chapter 48

first claiming

min struggled up the cobblestone street, pushing through crowds that stood whitefaced and staring,
those who were not screaming hysterically. a few ran, seemingly without any idea of where they were
running, but most moved like poorly handled puppets, more afraid to go than to stay. she searched the
faces, hoping to find egwene, or elayne, or nynaeve, but all she saw were falmen. and there was
something drawing her on, as surely as if she had a string tied to her.
once she turned to look back. seanchan ships burned in the harbor, and she could see more in flames
off the harbor mouth. many squarish vessels were already small against the setting sun, sailing west as
fast asdamane could make the winds drive them, and one small ship was beating away from the harbor,
tilting to catch a wind to take it along the coast.spray . she did not blame bayle domon for not waiting
longer, not after what she had seen; she thought it a wonder he had remained so long.
there was one seanchan vessel in the harbor not burning, though its towers were black from fires
already extinguished. as the tall ship crept toward the harbor mouth, a figure on horseback suddenly



appeared around the cliffs skirting the harbor. riding across the water. mins mouth fell open. silver
glittered as the figure raised a bow; a streak of silver lanced to the boxy ship, a gleaming line connecting
bow and ship. with a roar she could hear even at that distance, fire engulfed the foretower anew, and
sailors rushed about the deck.
min blinked, and when she looked again, the mounted figure was gone. the ship still slowly made way
toward the ocean, the crew fighting the flames.
she gave herself a shake and started to climb the street again. she had seen too much that day for
someone riding a horse across water to be more than a momentary distraction.even if it really was
birgitte and her bow. and artur hawkwing. i didsee him. i did.
in front of one of the tall stone buildings, she stopped uncertainly, ignoring the people who brushed past
her as if stunned. it was in there, somewhere, that she had to go. she rushed up the stairs and pushed
open the door.
no one tried to stop her. as far as she could tell, there was no one in the house. most of falme was out
in the streets, trying to decide whether they had all gone mad together. she went on through the house,
into the garden behind, and there he was.
rand lay sprawled on his back under an oak, face pale and eyes closed, left hand gripping a hilt that
ended in a foot of blade that appeared to have been melted at the end. his chest rose and fell too slowly,
and not with the regular rhythm of someone breathing normally.
taking a deep breath to calm herself, she went to see what she could do for him. first was to get rid of
that stub of a blade; he could hurt himself, or her, if he started thrashing. she pried his hand open, and
winced when the hilt stuck to his palm. she tossed it aside with a grimace. the heron on the hilt had
branded itself into his hand. but it was obvious to her that that was not what had him lying there
unconscious.how did he come by that? nynaeve can put a salve on it later.
a hasty examination showed that most of his cuts and bruises were not new  at least, the blood had
had time to dry in a crust, and the bruises had started to turn yellow at the edges  but there was a hole
burned through his coat on the left side. opening his coat, she pulled up his shirt. breath whistled through
her teeth. there was a wound burned into his side, but it had cauterized itself. what shook her was the
feel of his flesh. it had a touch of ice in it; he made the air seem warm.
grabbing his shoulders, she began to drag him toward the house. he hung limp, a dead weight. great
lummox, she grunted. you couldnt be short, and light, could you? you have to have all that leg and
shoulder. i ought to let you lie out here.
but she struggled up the steps, careful not to bump him any more than she could avoid, and pulled him
inside. leaving him just within the door, she knuckled the small of her back, muttering to herself about the
pattern, and made a hasty search. there was a small bedroom in the back of the house, perhaps a
servants room, with a bed piled high with blankets, and logs already laid on the hearth. in moments, she
had the blankets thrown back and the fire lit, as well as a lamp on the bedside table. then she went back
for rand.
it was no small task getting him to the room, or up onto the bed, but she managed it with only a little
hard breathing, and covered him up. after a moment, she stuck a hand under the blankets; she winced
and shook her head. the sheets were icy cold; he had no body warmth for the blankets to hold. with a
putupon sigh, she wriggled under the covers beside him. finally, she put his head on her arm. his eyes



were still closed, his breathing ragged, but she thought he would be dead by the time she came back if
she left to find nynaeve.he needs an aes sedai , she thought.all i can do is try to give him a little
warmth.
for a time she studied his face. it was only his face she saw; she could never read anyone who was not
conscious. i like older men, she told him. i like men with education, and wit. i have no interest in
farms, or sheep, or shepherds. especially boy shepherds. with a sigh, she smoothed back the hair from
his face; he had silky hair. but then, you arent a shepherd, are you? not anymore. light, why did the
pattern have to catch me up with you? why couldnt i have something safe and simple, like being
shipwrecked with no food and a dozen hungry aielmen?
there was a sound in the hall, and she raised her head as the door opened. egwene stood there, staring
at them by the light of the fire and the lamp. oh, was all she said.
mins cheeks colored.why am i behaving like im done something wrong? fool! i . . . im keeping
him warm. he is unconscious, and hes as cold as ice.
egwene did not come any further into the room. i  i felt him pulling at me. needing me. elayne felt it,
too. i thought it must be something to do with  with what he is, but nynaeve didnt feel anything. she
drew a deep, unsteady breath. elayne and nynaeve are getting the horses. we found bela. the
seanchan left most of their horses behind. nynaeve says we should go as soon as we can, and  and . .
. min, you know what he is, dont you, now?
i know. min wanted to take her arm from under rands head, but she could not make herself move.
i think i do, anyway. whatever he is, he is hurt. i can do nothing for him except keep him warm. maybe
nynaeve can.
min, you know . . . you do know that he cannot marry. he isnt . . . safe . . . for any of us, min.
speak for yourself, min said. she pulled rands face against her breast. its like elayne said. you
tossed him aside for the white tower. what should you care if i pick him up?
egwene looked at her for what seemed a long time. not at rand, not at all, only at her. she felt her face
growing hotter and wanted to look away, but she could not.
i will bring nynaeve, egwene said finally, and walked out of the room with her back straight and her
head high.
min wanted to call out, to go after her, but she lay there as if frozen. frustrated tears stung her eyes.its
what has to be. i know it. i read it in all of them. light, i dont want to be part of this . its all
your fault, she told rands still shape. no, it isnt. but you will pay for it, i think. were all caught like
flies in a spiderweb. what if i told her theres another woman yet to come, one she doesnt even know?
for that matter, what would you think of that, my fine lord shepherd? you arent badlooking at all, but
. . . light, i dont even know if i am the one youll choose. i dont know if i want you to choose me. or
will you try to dandle all three of us on your knee? it may not be your fault, rand althor, but it isnt
fair.
not rand althor, said a musical voice from the door. lews therin telamon. the dragon reborn.
min stared. she was the most beautiful woman min had ever seen, with pale, smooth skin, and long,
black hair, and eyes as dark as night. her dress was a white that would make snow seem dingy, belted in



silver. all her jewelry was silver. min felt herself bristle. what do you mean? who are you?
the woman came to stand over the bed  her movements were so graceful, min felt a stab of envy,
though she had never before envied any woman anything  and smoothed rands hair as if min were
not there. he doesnt believe yet, i think. he knows, but he does not believe. i have guided his steps,
pushed him, pulled him, enticed him. he was always stubborn, but this time i will shape him. ishamael
thinks he controls events, but i do. her finger brushed rands forehead as if drawing a mark; min
thought uneasily that it looked like the dragons fang. rand stirred, murmuring, the first sound or
movement he had made since she found him.
who are you? min demanded. the woman looked at her, only looked, but she found herself shrinking
back into the pillows, clutching rand to her fiercely.
i am called lanfear, girl.
mins mouth was abruptly so dry she could not have spoken if her life depended on it.one of the
forsaken! no! light, no! all she could do was shake her head. the denial made lanfear smile.
lews therin was and is mine, girl. tend him well for me until i come for him. and she was gone.
min gaped. one moment she was there, then she was gone. min discovered she was hugging rands
unconscious form tightly. she wished she did not feel as if she wanted him to protect her.

gaunt face set with grim purpose, byar galloped with the sinking sun behind him and never looked back.
he had seen all he needed to, all he could with that accursed fog. the legion was dead, lord captain
geofram bornhald was dead, and there was only one explanation for that; darkfriends had betrayed
them, darkfriends like that perrin of the two rivers. that word he had to carry to dain bornhald, the
lord captains son, with the children of the light watching tar valon. but he had worse to tell, and to
none less than pedron niall himself. he had to tell what he had seen in the sky above falme. he flogged
his horse with his reins and never looked back.

chapter 49

what was meant to be

rand opened his eyes and found himself staring up at sunlight slanting through the branches of a
leatherleaf, its broad, tough leaves still green despite the time of year. the wind stirring the leaves carried



a hint of snow, come nightfall. he lay on his back, and he could feel blankets covering him under his
hands. his coat and shirt seemed to be gone, but something was binding his chest, and his left side hurt.
he turned his head, and min was sitting there on the ground, watching him. he almost did not know her,
wearing skirts. she smiled uncertainly.
min. it is you. where did you come from? where are we? his memory came in flashes and patches.
old things he could remember, but the last few days seemed like bits of broken mirror, spinning through
his mind, showing glimpses that were gone before he could see them clearly.
from falme, she said. were five days east of there, now, and youve been asleep all that time.
falme. more memory. mat had blown the horn of valere. egwene! is she . . . ? did they free her?
he held his breath.
i dont know what they you mean, but shes free. we freed her ourselves.
we? i dont understand.shes free. at least she is 
nynaeve, and elayne, and me.
nynaeve? elayne? how? you wereall in falme? he struggled to sit up, but she pushed him back
down easily and stayed there, hands on his shoulders, eyes intent on his face. where is she?
gone. mins face colored. theyre all gone. egwene, and nynaeve, and mat, and hurin, and verin.
hurin didnt want to leave you, really. theyre on their way to tar valon. egwene and nynaeve back to
their training in the tower, and mat for whatever the aes sedai have to do about that dagger. they took
the horn of valere with them. i cant believe i actually saw it.
gone, he muttered. she didnt even wait till i woke up. the red in mins cheeks deepened, and she
sat back, staring at her lap.
he raised his hands to run them over his face, and stopped, staring at his palms in shock. there was a
heron branded across his left palm, too, now, to match the one on his right, every line clean and true.
once the heron to set his path; twice the heron to name him true . no!
they are gone, she said. saying no wont change it.
he shook his head. something told him the pain in his side was important. he could not remember being
injured, but it was important. he started to lift his blankets to look, but she slapped his hands away.
you cant do any good with that. it isnt healed all the way, yet. verin tried healing, but she said it
didnt work the way it should. she hesitated, nibbling her lip. moiraine says nynaeve must have done
something, or you wouldnt have lived till we carried you to verin, but nynaeve says she was too
frightened to light a candle. there is . . . something wrong with your wound. you will have to wait for it to
heal naturally. she seemed troubled.
moiraine is here? he barked a bitter laugh. when you said verin was gone, i thought i was free of
aes sedai again.
i am here, moiraine said. she appeared, all in blue and as serene as if she stood in the white tower,
strolling up to stand over him. min was frowning at the aes sedai. rand had the odd feeling that she



meant to protect him from moiraine.
i wish you werent here, he told the aes sedai. as far as i am concerned, you can go back to
wherever youve been hiding and stay there.
i have not been hiding, moiraine said calmly. i have been doing what i could, here on toman head,
and in falme. it was little enough, though i learned much. i failed to rescue two of my sisters before the
seanchan herded them onto the ships with the leashed ones, but i did what i could.
what you could. you sent verin to shepherd me, but im no sheep, moiraine. you said i could go
where i wanted, and i mean to go where you are not.
i did not send verin. moiraine frowned. she did that on her own. you are of interest to a great many
people, rand. did fain find you, or you him?
the sudden change of topic took him by surprise. fain? no. a fine hero i make. i tried to rescue
egwene, and min did it before me. fain said he would hurt emonds field if i didnt face him, and i
never laid eyes on him. did he go with the seanchan, too?
moiraine shook her head. i do not know. i wish i did. but it is as well you did not find him, not until
you know what he is, at least.
hes a darkfriend.
more than that. worse than that. padan fain was the dark ones creature to the depths of his soul, but
i believe that in shadar logoth he fell afoul of mordeth, who was as vile in fighting the shadow as ever
the shadow itself was. mordeth tried to consume fains soul, to have a human body again, but found a
soul that had been touched directly by the dark one, and what resulted . . . what resulted was neither
padan fain nor mordeth, but something far more evil, a blend of the two. fain  let us call him that 
is more dangerous than you can believe. you might not have survived such a meeting, and if you had, you
might have been worse than turned to the shadow.
if he is alive, if he did not go with the seanchan, i have to   he cut off as she produced his
heronmark sword from under her cloak. the blade ended abruptly a foot from the hilt, as if it had been
melted. memory came crashing back. i killed him, he said softly. this time i killed him.
moiraine put the ruined sword aside like the useless thing it now was, and wiped her hands together.
the dark one is not slain so easily. the mere fact that he appeared in the sky above falme is more than
merely troubling. he should not be able to do that, if he is bound as we believe. and if he is not, why has
he not destroyed us all? min stirred uneasily.
in the sky? rand said in wonder.
both of you, moiraine said. your battle took place across the sky, in full view of every soul in falme.
perhaps in other towns on toman head, too, if half what i hear is to be believed.
we  we saw it all, min said in a faint voice. she put a hand over one of rands comfortingly.
moiraine reached under her cloak again and came out with a rolled parchment, one of the large sheets
such as the street artists in falme used. the chalks were a little smudged when she unfurled it, but the
picture was still clear enough. a man whose face was a solid flame fought with a staff against another



with a sword among clouds where lightning danced, and behind them rippled the dragon banner. rands
face was easily recognizable.
how many have seen that? he demanded. tear it up. burn it.
the aes sedai let the parchment roll back up. it would do no good, rand. i bought that two days
gone, in a village we passed through. there are hundreds of them, perhaps thousands, and the tale is
being told everywhere of how the dragon battled the dark one in the skies above falme.
rand looked at min. she nodded reluctantly, and squeezed his hand. she looked frightened, but she did
not flinch away.i wonder if thats why egwene left. she was right to leave.
the pattern weaves itself around you even more tightly, moiraine said. you need me now more than
ever.
i dont need you, he said harshly, and i dont want you. i will not have anything to do with this. he
remembered being called lews therin; not only by baalzamon, but by artur hawkwing. i wont. light,
the dragon is supposed to break the world again, to tear everything apart. i will not be the dragon.
you are what you are, moiraine said. already you stir the world. the black ajah has revealed itself
for the first time in two thousand years. arad doman and tarabon were on the brink of war, and it will
be worse when news of falme reaches them. cairhien is in civil war.
i did nothing in cairhien, he protested. you cant blame that on me.
doing nothing was always a ploy in the great game, she said with a sigh, and especially as they play
it now. you were the spark, and cairhien exploded like an illuminators firework. what do you think will
happen when word of falme reaches arad doman and tarabon? there have always been men willing to
proclaim for any man who called himself the dragon, but they have never before had such signs as this.
there is more. here. she tossed a pouch on his chest.
he hesitated a moment before opening it. within lay shards of what seemed to be blackandwhite
glazed pottery. he had seen their like before. another seal on the dark ones prison, he mumbled.
min gasped; her grip on his hand sought comfort, now, rather than offering it.
two, moiraine said. three of the seven are broken now. the one i had, and two i found in the high
lords dwelling in falme. when all seven are broken, perhaps even before, the patch men put over the
hole they drilled into the prison the creator made will be torn asunder, and the dark one will once more
be able to put his hand through that hole and touch the world. and the only hope of the world is that the
dragon reborn will be there to face him.
min tried to stop rand from throwing back the blankets, but he pushed her gently aside. i need to
walk. she helped him up, but with a great many sighs and grumbles about him making his wound worse.
he discovered that his chest was wrapped round with bandages. min draped one of the blankets about
his shoulders like a cloak.
for a moment he stood staring down at the heronmark sword, what was left of it, lying on the ground.
tams sword. my fathers sword . reluctantly, more reluctantly than he had ever done anything in his
life, he let go of the hope that he would discover tam really was his father. it felt as if he were tearing his
heart out. but it did not change the way he felt about tam, and emonds field was the only home he had
ever known.fain is the important thing. i have one duty left. stopping him.



the two women had to support him, one on either arm, down to where the campfires were already
burning, not far from a road of hardpacked dirt. loial was there, reading a book,to sail beyond the
sunset , and perrin, staring into one of the fires. the shienarans were making preparations for their
evening meal. lan sat under a tree sharpening his sword; the warder gave rand a careful look, then a
nod.
there was something else, too. the dragon banner rippled on the wind over the middle of the camp.
somewhere they had found a proper staff to replace perrins sapling.
rand demanded, what is that doing out where anybody who passes by can see it?
it is too late to hide, rand, moiraine said. it was always too late for you to hide.
you dont have to put up a sign saying here i am, either. ill never find fain if somebody kills me
because of that banner. he turned to loial and perrin. im glad you stayed. i would have understood if
you hadnt.
why would i not stay? loial said. you are even moretaveren than i believed, true, but you are still
my friend. i hope you are still my friend. his ears twitched uncertainly.
i am, rand said. for as long as its safe for you to be around me, and even after, too. the ogiers
grin nearly split his face in two.
im staying as well, perrin said. there was a note of resignation, or acceptance, in his voice. the
wheel weaves us tight in the pattern, rand. who would have thought it, back in emonds field?
the shienarans were gathering around. to rands surprise, they all fell to their knees. every one of them
watched him.
we would pledge ourselves to you, uno said. the others kneeling with him nodded.
your oaths are to ingtar, and lord agelmar, rand protested. ingtar died well, uno. he died so the
rest of us could escape with the horn. there was no need to tell them or anyone else the rest. he hoped
that ingtar had found the light again. tell lord agelmar that when you return to fal dara.
it is said, the oneeyed man said carefully, that when the dragon is reborn, he will break all oaths,
shatter all ties. nothing holds us, now. we would give our oaths to you. he drew his sword and laid it
before him, hilt toward rand, and the rest of the shienarans did the same.
you battled the dark one, masema said. masema, who hated him. masema, who looked at him as if
seeing a vision of the light. i saw you, lord dragon. i saw. i am your man, to the death. his dark eyes
shone with fervor.
you must choose, rand, moiraine said. the world will be broken whether you break it or not.
tarmon gaidon will come, and that alone will tear the world apart. will you still try to hide from what
you are, and leave the world to face the last battle undefended? choose.
they were all watching him, all waiting.death is lighter than a feather, duty heavier than a mountain
. he made his decision.



chapter 50

after

by ship and horse the stories spread, by merchant wagon and man on foot, told and retold, changing yet
always alike at the heart, to arad doman and tarabon and beyond, of signs and portents in the sky
above falme. and men proclaimed themselves for the dragon, and other men struck them down and
were struck down in turn.
other tales spread, of a column that rode from the sinking sun across almoth plain. a hundred
bordermen, it was said. no, a thousand. no, a thousand heroes come back from the grave to answer
the call of the horn of valere. ten thousand. they had destroyed a legion of the children of the light
entire. they had thrown artur hawkwings returned armies back into the sea. they were artur
hawkwings armies returned. toward the mountains they rode, toward the dawn.
yet one thing every tale had the same. at their head rode a man whose face had been seen in the sky
above falme, and they rode under the banner of the dragon reborn.

and men cried out to the creator, praying, o light of the heavens, light of the world, let the
promised one be born of the mountain, according to the prophecies, as he was in ages past and
will be in ages to come. let the prince of the morning sing to the land that green things will grow
and the valleys give forth lambs. let the arm of the lord of the dawn shelter us from the dark,
and the great sword of justice defend us. let the dragon ride again on the winds of time.

 fromcharal drianaan te calamon,
the cycle of the dragon,
author unknown, the fourth age

the end
of the second book of
the wheel of time



table of contents
the great hunt
by robert jordan
map 1  two rivers
map 2  andor
map 3  borderlands
prologue
in the shadow
chapter 1
the flame of tar valon
chapter 2
the welcome
chapter 3
friends and enemies
chapter 4
summoned
chapter 5
the shadow in shienar
chapter 6
dark prophecy
chapter 7
blood calls blood
chapter 8
the dragon reborn
chapter 9
leavetakings
chapter 10
the hunt begins
chapter 11
glimmers of the pattern
chapter 12
woven in the pattern
chapter 13
from stone to stone
chapter 14
wolf brother
chapter 15
kinslayer
chapter 16
in the mirror of darkness
chapter 17
choices
chapter 18
to the white tower
chapter 19
beneath the dagger
chapter 20



saidin
chapter 21
the nine rings
chapter 22
watchers
chapter 23
the testing
chapter 24
new friends and old enemies
chapter 25
cairhien
chapter 26
discord
chapter 27
the shadow in the night
chapter 28
a new thread in the pattern
chapter 29
seanchan
chapter 30
daes daemar
chapter 31
on the scent
chapter 32
dangerous words
chapter 33
a message from the dark
chapter 34
the wheel weaves
chapter 35
stedding tsofu
chapter 36
among the elders
chapter 37
what might be
chapter 38
practice
chapter 39
flight from the white tower
chapter 40
damane
chapter 41
disagreements
chapter 42
falme
chapter 43
a plan
chapter 44
five will ride forth
chapter 45
blademaster



chapter 46
to come out of the shadow
chapter 47
the grave is no bar to my call
chapter 48
first claiming
chapter 49
what was meant to be
chapter 50
after
the end of the second book of the wheel of time
glossary
about this book . . .
about the author:

glossary

a note on dates in this glossary.three systems of recording dates have been in general use
since the breaking of the world. the first recorded years after the breaking (ab). since the years of the
breaking and immediately after were years of almost total chaos, and since this calendar was adopted a
good hundred years after the end of the breaking, its starting point was arbitrarily assigned. at the end of
the trolloc wars many records had been lost, so much so that there was argument about the exact year
under the old system. a new calendar was therefore established, dating from the end of the wars and
celebrating the supposed freedom of the world from the trolloc threat. this second calendar recorded
each year as free year (fy). after the disruption, death, and destruction caused by the war of the
hundred years, a third calendar came into being. this calendar, of the new era (ne), is currently in use.
adam(ayedam): a device, consisting of a collar and a bracelet linked by a silvery metal leash, that
may be used to control, against her will, any woman who can channel. the collar is worn by thedamane ,
the bracelet by thesuldam .see alsodamane ;suldam . aes sedai(eyez sehdeye): wielders of the
one power. since the time of madness, all surviving aes sedai are women. widely distrusted and
feared, even hated, they are blamed by many for the breaking of the world, and are thought to meddle in
the affairs of nations. at the same time, few rulers will be without an aes sedai adviser, even in lands
where the existence of such a connection must be kept secret.see also ajah; amyrlin seat; time of
madness. agelmar; lord agelmar of house jagad(aghelmar; jahgad): lord of fal dara. his
sign is three running red foxes. age of legends: the age ended by the war of the shadow and the
breaking of the world. a time when aes sedai performed wonders now only dreamed of.see also
wheel of time; breaking of the world; war of the shadow. aiel(eyeeel): the people of the aiel
waste. fierce and hardy. also called aielmen. they veil their faces before they kill, giving rise to the
saying acting like a blackveiled aiel to describe someone who is being violent. deadly warriors with
weapons or with nothing but their bare hands, they will not touch a sword. their pipers play them into



battle with the music of dances, and aielmen call battle the dance.see also aiel warrior societies; aiel
waste. aiel warrior societies: aiel warriors are all members of one of the warrior societies, such as
the stone dogs, the red shields, or the maidens of the spear. each society has its own customs, and
sometimes specific duties. for example, red shields act as police. stone dogs often vow not to retreat
once battle has been joined, and will die to the last man if necessary to fulfill this vow. the clans of the
aiel frequently fight among themselves, but members of the same society will not fight one another even if
their clans are doing so. in this way, there are always lines of contact between the clans even when they
are in open warfare.see also aiel; aiel waste;far dareis mai . aiel waste: the harsh, rugged, and
allbutwaterless land east of the spine of the world. few outsiders venture there, not only because
water is almost impossible to find for one not born there, but because the aiel consider themselves at war
with all other peoples and do not welcome strangers. ajah(ahjah): societies among the aes sedai to
which all aes sedai except the amyrlin seat belong. they are designated by colors: blue, red, white,
green, brown, yellow, and gray. each follows a specific philosophy of the use of the one power and
the purposes of the aes sedai. for example, the red ajah bends all its energies to finding men who are
attempting to wield the power and to gentling them. the brown ajah, on the other hand, forsakes
involvement with the mundane world and dedicates itself to seeking knowledge. there are rumors (hotly
denied, and never safely mentioned in front of any aes sedai) of a black ajah, dedicated to serving the
dark one. alanna mosvani(ahlannah mosvanhnie): an aes sedai of the green ajah. alantin
(ahlanhtin): in the old tongue, brother; short fortia avende alantin , brother to the trees;
treebrother. alar(ayelahr): eldest of the elders of stedding tsofu. aldieb(ahldeeb): in the old
tongue, west wind, the wind that brings the spring rains. almeara, nynaeve(ahlmeerah,
nighneev): a woman from emonds field, in the two rivers district of andor (andoor). althor,
rand(ahlthor, rand): a young man from emonds field, once a shepherd. alvere, egwene(
ahlveer, ehgwain): a young woman from emonds field. amalisa, lady(ahmahleesah):
shienaran of house jagad; lord agelmars sister. amyrlin seat(ahmehrlin seat): (1) the title of
the leader of the aes sedai. elected for life by the hall of the tower, the highest council of the aes
sedai, which onsists of three representatives (called sitters) from each of the seven ajahs. the amyrlin
seat has, theoretically at least, almost supreme authority among the aes sedai, and ranks socially as the
equal of a king or queen. a slightly less formal usage is simply the amyrlin. (2) the throne upon which
the leader of the aes sedai sits. anaiya(ahnyeyah): an aes sedai of the blue ajah. angreal(
anhgreeahl): a very rare object that allows anyone capable of channeling the one power to handle a
greater amount of the power than would be safely possible unaided. remnants of the age of legends,
the means of their making is no longer known. few remain in existence.see alsosaangreal ;terangreal
. arad doman(ahrahd domahn): a nation on the aryth ocean. arafel(ahrahfehl): one of the
borderlands. avendesora(ahvehndehs0rah): in the old tongue, the tree of life. mentioned in
many stories and legends. aybara, perrin(aybahrah, pehrrihn): a young man from emonds
field, formerly a blacksmiths apprentice. baalzamon(bahahlzahmon): in the trolloc tongue,
heart of the dark. believed to be the trolloc name for the dark one.see also dark one; trollocs.
barthanes, lord, of house damodred(bahrthannehs): cairhienin lord, second only to the king in
power. his personal sign is the charging boar. the sign of house damodred is the crown and tree.
bel tine(behl tine): spring festival celebrating the end of winter, the first sprouting of crops, and the
birth of the first lambs. betrayer of hope: seeishamael. birgitte(bergeetteh): goldenhaired
heroine of legend and a hundred gleemens tales, she had a silver bow and silver arrows, with which she
never missed. bittern(bihttehrn): a musical instrument that may have six, nine, or twelve strings, and
is held flat on the knees and played by plucking or strumming. blasted lands: desolated lands
surrounding shayol ghul, beyond the great blight. blight, the: seegreat blight, the. borderlands, the:
the nations bordering the great blight. saldaea, arafel, kandor, and shienar. bornhald, geofram(
bohrnhahld, jehfrahm): a lord captain of the children of the light. breaking of the world,
the: during the time of madness, male aes sedai who had gone insane, and who could wield the one
power to a degree now unknown, changed the face of the earth. they caused great earthquakes, leveled
old mountain ranges and raised new mountains, lifted dry land where seas had been and made the ocean



rush in where dry land had been. many parts of the world were completely depopulated, and the
survivors were scattered like dust on the wind. this destruction is remembered in stories, legends, and
history as the breaking of the world.see also time of madness. byar, jaret(byahr, jahret): an
officer of the children of the light. caemlyn(kaymlihn): the capital city of andor. cairhien(
keyereeehn): both a nation along the spine of the world and the capital city of that nation. the city
was burned and looted during the aiel war (976978 ne). the sign of cairhien is a many rayed golden
sun rising from the bottom of a field of sky blue. carallain(kahrahlayn): one of the nations wrung
from artur hawkwings empire during the war of the hundred years. it weakened thereafter, and the
last traces vanished about 500 ne. cauthon, mat(cawthon, mat): a young man from the two
rivers. full name: matrim (matrihm) cauthon. channel(verb): to control the flow of the one power.
see also one power. children of the light: a society holding strict ascetic beliefs, dedicated to the
defeat of the dark one and the destruction of all darkfriends. founded during the war of the hundred
years by lothair mantelar (lohthayr mahnteelahr) to proselytize against the increasing numbers
of darkfriends, they evolved during the war into a completely military organization, extremely rigid in their
beliefs, and completely certain that only they know the truth and the right. they hate aes sedai,
considering them, and any who support or befriend them, darkfriends. they are known disparagingly as
whitecloaks. their sign is a golden sunburst on a field of white. chronicles, keeper of the: second in
authority to the amyrlin seat among the aes sedai, she also acts as secretary to the amyrlin. chosen for
life by the hall of the tower, and usually of the same ajah as the amyrlin.see also amyrlin seat; ajah.
corenne(kohreenneh): in the old tongue, return, or the return. covenant of the ten
nations: a union formed in the centuries after the breaking of the world when nations were first
recreated (circa 300 ab). dedicated to the defeat of the dark one. broken apart by the trolloc wars.
see also trolloc wars. cuendillar(cwainderyar): also known as heartstone.see heartstone, daes
daemar(dahess daymar): the great game, also known as the game of houses. name given the
scheming, plots, and manipulations for advantage by the noble houses. great value is given to subtlety, to
aiming at one thing while seeming to aim at another, and to achieving ends with the least visible effort.
dai shan(dye shan): a title in the borderlands meaning diademed battle lord.see also
borderlands. damane(dahmahnee): in the old tongue, leashed ones. women who can channel
who are held prisoner byadam and used by the seanchan for many purposes, chiefest of these being as
weapons in battle.see also seanchan;adam ;suldam . damodred, lord galadedrid(
dahmohdrehd, gahlardehdrihd): halfbrother to elayne and gawyn. his sign is a winged silver
sword, point down. darkfriends: those who follow the dark one and believe they will gain great
power and rewards, and even immortality, when he is freed from his prison. dark one: most common
name, used in every land, for shaitan. the source of evil, antithesis of the creator. imprisoned by the
creator at the moment of creation in a prison at shayol ghul. an attempt to free him from that prison
brought about the war of the shadow, the tainting ofsaidin , the breaking of the world, and the end of
the age of legends. dark one, naming the: saying the true name of the dark one (shaitan) draws
his attention, inevitably bringing ill fortune at best, disaster at worst. for that reason, many euphemisms
are used, among them the dark one, father of lies, sightblinder, lord of the grave, shepherd of the
night, heartsbane, heartfang, grassburner, and leafblighter. someone who seems to be inviting ill
fortune is often said to be naming the dark one. daughterheir: title of the heir to the throne of
andor. the eldest daughter of the queen succeeds her mother on the throne. without a surviving
daughter, the throne goes to the nearest female blood relation of the queen. daughter of the night:
seelanfear. dome of truth: great audience hall of the children of the light, located in amador (
ahmahdoor), the capital of amadicia (ahmahdeeceeah). there is a king of amadicia, but the
children rule in all but name.see also children of the light. do miere avron(doh meehr
avrawn): seewatchers over the waves. domon, bayle(dohmon, bail): the captain of the
spray , who collects old things. draghkar(draghkahr): a creature of the dark one, made originally
by twisting human stock. a draghkar appears to be a large man with batlike wings, whose skin is too
pale and whose eyes are too large. the draghkars song can draw its prey to it, suppressing the victims
will. there is a saying: the kiss of the draghkar is death. it does not bite, but its kiss will consume first



the soul of its victim, and then its life. dragon, false: occasionally men claim to be the dragon reborn,
and sometimes one of them gains following enough to require an army to put it down. some have begun
wars that involved many nations. over the centuries most of these have been men unable to channel the
one power, but a few could do so. all, however, either disappeared or were captured or killed without
fulfilling any of the prophecies concerning the rebirth of the dragon. these men are called false dragons.
among those who could channel, the most powerful were raolin darksbane (33536ab), yurian
stonebow (circa 13001308 ab), davian (fy 351), guaire amalasan (fy 93943), and logain (997
ne).see also dragon reborn. dragon, prophecies of the: little known and seldom spoken of, the
prophecies, given inthe karaethon cycle , foretell that the dark one will be freed again to touch the
world. and that lews therin telamon, the dragon, breaker of the world, will be reborn to fight tarmon
gaidon, the last battle against the shadow.see also dragon, the. dragon, the: the name by which
lews therin telamon was known during the war of the shadow. in the madness that overtook all male
aes sedai, lews therin killed every living person who carried any of his blood, as well as everyone he
loved, thus earning the name kinslayer.see also dragon reborn; dragon, prophecies of the. dragon
reborn: according to prophecy and legend the dragon will be born again at mankinds greatest hour of
need to save the world. this is not something people look forward to, both because the prophecies say
the dragon reborn will bring a new breaking to the world and because lews therin kinslayer, the
dragon, is a name to make men shudder, even more than three thousand years after his death.see also
dragon, the; dragon, false; dragon, prophecies of the. dragons fang, the: a stylized mark in the
shape of a teardrop balanced on its point. scrawled on a door or a house, it is an accusation of evil
against the people inside, or an attempt to bring the dark ones attention, and thus harm, to them.
dreadlords: those men and women who, able to channel the one power, went over to the shadow
during the trolloc wars, acting as commanders of the trolloc forces. elaida(ehlyda): an aes sedai
of the red ajah who advises queen morgase of andor. she sometimes has the foretelling.see also
foretelling. elayne(eelain): queen morgases daughter, the daughterheir to the throne of andor.
her sign is a golden lily. fain, padan(fain, pahdahn): a man imprisoned as a darkfriend in fal
dara keep. far dareis mai(fahr dahrize my): literally maidens of the spear. a warrior society
of the aiel, which, unlike any of the others, admits women and only women. a maiden may not marry
and remain in the society, nor may she fight while carrying a child. any child born to a maiden is given to
another woman to raise, in such a way that no one knows who the childs mother was. (you may belong
to no man, nor may any man belong to you, nor any child. the spear is your lover, your child, and your
life.) these children are treasured, for it is prophesied that a child born of a maiden will unite the clans
and return the aiel to the greatness they knew during the age of legends.see also aiel; aiel warrior
societies. five powers, the: there are threads to the one power, and each person who can channel
can usually grasp some threads better than others. these threads are named according to the sorts of
things that can be done using them  earth, air, fire, water, and spirit  and are called the five
powers. any wielder of the power will have a greater degree of strength with one, or possibly two, of
these, and lesser strength in the others. some few may have great strength with three, but since the age
of legends no one has had great strength with all five. even then this was extremely rate. the degree of
strength can vary greatly between individuals, so that some who can channel are much stronger than
others. performing certain acts with the one power requires ability in one or more of the five powers.
for example, starting or controlling a fire requires fire, and affecting the weather requires air and water,
while healing requires water and spirit. while spirit was found equally in men and in women, great
ability with earth and/or fire was found much more often among men; with water and/or air among
women. there were exceptions, but it was so often so that earth and fire came to be regarded as male
powers, air and water as female. generally, no ability is considered stronger than any other, though
there is a saying among aes sedai: there is no rock so strong that water and wind cannot wear it away,
no fire so fierce that water cannot quench it or wind snuff it out. it should be noted this saying came into
use long after the last male aes sedai was dead. any equivalent saying among male aes sedai is long
lost. flame of tar valon: the symbol of tar valon, the amyrlin seat, and the aes sedai. a stylized
representation of a flame; a white teardrop with the point upward. forsaken, the: name given to



thirteen of the most powerful aes sedai ever known, who went over to the dark one during the war of
the shadow in return for the promise of immortality. according to both legend and fragmentary records,
they were imprisoned along with the dark one when his prison was resealed. their names are still used
to frighten children. gaidin(gyedeen): literally, brother to battles  a title used by aes sedai for the
warders.see also warder. galad(gahlahd): seedamodred, lord galadedrid, galldrian su
riatin rie(gahldreeahn soo reyeahtin ree): literally, galldrian of house riatin, king. king of
cairhien.see also cairhien. game of houses, the: seedaes daemar. gawyn(gahwihn): queen
morgases son, and elaynes brother. his sign is a white boar. gentling: the act, performed by aes
sedai, of shutting off a male who can channel from the one power. this is necessary because any man
who learns to channel will go insane from the taint onsaidin and will almost certainly do horrible things
with the power in his madness. a man who has been gentled can still sense the true source, but he
cannot touch it. whatever madness has come before gentling is arrested by the act of gentling, but not
cured by it, and if it is done soon enough death can be averted.see also one power, the; stilling.
gleeman: a traveling storyteller, musician, juggler, tumbler, and allaround entertainer. known by their
trademark cloaks of manycolored patches, they perform mainly in the villages and smaller towns.
goaban(goahbanh): one of the nations wrung from artur hawkwings empire during the war of the
hundred years. it weakened, and faded away approximately 500 ne.see also artur hawkwing; war
of the hundred years. great blight, the: a region in the far north, entirely corrupted by the dark one.
a haunt of trollocs, myrddraal, and other creatures of the shadow. great game, the: seedaes
daemar. great hunt of the horn, the: a cycle of stories concerning the legendary search for the
horn of valere, in the years between the end of the trolloc wars and the beginning of the war of the
hundred years. if told in its entirety, the cycle would take many days. great lord of the dark: the
name by which darkfriends refer to the dark one, claiming that to use his true name would be
blasphemous. great serpent: a symbol for time and eternity, ancient before the age of legends began,
consisting of a serpent eating its own tail. a ring in the shape of the great serpent is awarded to women
who have been raised to the accepted among the aes sedai. hailene(heyeleeneh): in the old
tongue, those who come before, or forerunners. halfman: seemyrddraal. hardan: one of the
nations wrung from artur hawkwings empire, now long forgotten. it lay between cairhien and shienar.
hawkwing, artur: a legendary king (ruled fy 943994) who united all the lands west of the spine of
the world, as well as some lands beyond the aiel waste. he even sent armies across the aryth ocean
(fy 992), but all contact with these was lost at his death, which set off the war of the hundred years.
his sign was a golden hawk. in flight.see also war of the hundred years. heartstone: an indestructible
substance created during the age of legends. any force used in an attempt to break it is absorbed,
making heartstone stronger. hide: a unit of area for measuring land, equal to 100 paces by 100 paces.
horn of valere(vahleer): the legendary object of the great hunt of the horn. the horn
supposedly can call back dead heroes from the grave to fight against the shadow. hundred
companions, the: one hundred male aes sedai, among the most powerful of the age of legends,
who, led by lews therin telamon, launched the final stroke that ended the war of the shadow by
sealing the dark one back into his prison. the dark ones counterstroke taintedsaidin ; the hundred
companions went mad and began the breaking of the world.see also time of madness; breaking of
the world; true source; one power. hurin(hewthin): a shienaran who has the ability to smell
where violence has been done, and to follow the scent of those who did it. called a sniffer, he serves
the kings justice in fal dara, in shienar. illian(ihlleeahn): a great port on the sea of storms,
capital city of the nation of the same name. ingtar, lord, of house shinowa(ihngtahr); (
shihnohwah): a shienaran warrior. his sign is the gray owl. ishamael(ihshahmayehl): in the
old tongue, betrayer of hope. one of the forsaken. name given to the leader of the aes sedai who
went over to the dark one in the war of the shadow. it is said that even he forgot his true name.see
also forsaken. karaethon cycle, the(kareeahthon): seedragon, prophecies of the. kith: close
friends and acquaintances. laman(laymahn): a king of cairhien, of house damodred, who lost his
throne and life in the aiel war. lan; allan mandragoran(ahllan mandragoran): a warder,
bonded to moiraine. uncrowned king of malkier, dai shan, and the last surviving malkieri lord.see



also warder; moiraine; malkier; dai shan. lanfear(lanfear): in the old tongue, daughter of the
night. one of the forsaken, perhaps the most powerful next to ishamael. unlike the other forsaken,
she chose this name herself. she is said to have been in love with lews therin telamon.see also
forsaken; dragon, the. league: seelength, units of. leane(leeahneh): an aes sedai of the blue
ajah, and keeper of the chronicles.see also ajah; chronicles, keeper of the. leashed ones: see
damane. length, units of: 10 inches = 3 hands = 1 foot; 3 feet = 1 pace; 2 paces = 1 span; 1000
spans = 1 mile; 4 miles = 1 league. lews therin telamon; lews therin kinslayer: seedragon, the.
liandrin(leeahndrihn): an aes sedai of the red ajah, from tarabon. logain(lohgayn): a false
dragon, gentled by the aes sedai. loial(loyahl): an ogier from stedding shangtai. luc; lord luc
of house mantear(luke; manteeahr): tigraines brother. his disappearance in the great blight
(971 ne) is believed to be connected to tigraines later disappearance. his sign was an acorn. luthair:
seemondwin, luthair paendrag. malkier(mahlkeer): a nation, once one of the borderlands, now
consumed by the blight. the sign of malkier was a golden crane in flight. manetheren(
mahnehthehrehn): one of the ten nations that made the second covenant, and also the capital
city of that nation. both city and nation were utterly destroyed in the trolloc wars. marathdamane(
mahrahthdahmahnee): in the old tongue, those who must be leashed. term used by the
seanchan for women who can channel, but who have not yet been captured and collared.see also
damane ;adam ; seanchan. masema(mahseemah): a shienaran soldier who hates aiel. mashiara(
mahsheeahrah): in the old tongue, beloved, but meaning a love that is lost beyond redeeming.
merrilin, thom(merrihlihn, tom): a gleeman. mile: seelength, units of. min(min): a young
woman with the ability to read the auras she sometimes sees surrounding people. moiraine(
mwahrain): an aes sedai of the blue ajah. mondwin, luthair paendrag(lewthair
payehndrag mondwihn): son of artur hawkwing, he commanded the armies hawkwing sent
across the aryth ocean. his banner was a golden, spreadwinged hawk clutching lightning bolts.see
also hawkwing, artur. mordeth(moordeath): councilor who turned the city of aridhol to use
darkfriends ways against the darkfriends, thus bringing its destruction and earning .it a new name,
shadar logoth (where the shadow waits). only one thing survives in shadar logoth beside the hate
that killed it, and that is mordeth himself, bound in the ruins for two thousand years, waiting for someone
to come whose soul he can consume and so take on new flesh. morgase(moorgayz): queen of
andor, high seat of house trakand (trahkahnd). myrddraal(muhrddraal): creatures of the
dark one, commanders of the trollocs. twisted offspring of trollocs in which the human stock used to
create the trollocs has resurfaced, but tainted by the evil that made the trollocs. physically they are like
men except they have no eyes, but can see like eagles in light or dark. they have certain powers
stemming from the dark one, including the ability to cause paralyzing fear with a look and the ability to
vanish wherever there are shadows. one of their few known weaknesses is that they are reluctant to
cross running water. in different lands they are known by many names, among them halfmen, the
eyeless, shadowmen, lurks, and fades. niall, pedron(neyeawl, paydrohn): lord captain
commander of the children of the light.see also children of the light. nisura, lady(nihsoorah): a
shienaran noblewoman, and one of the lady amalisas attendants. one power, the: the power drawn
from the true source. the vast majority of people are completely unable to learn to channel the one
power. a very small number can be taught to channel, and an even tinier number have the ability inborn.
for these few there is no need to be taught; they will touch the true source and channel the power
whether they want to or not, perhaps without even realizing what they are doing. this inborn ability
usually manifests itself in late adolescence or early adulthood. if control is not taught, or selflearned
(extremely difficult, with a success rate of only one in four), death is certain. since the time of madness,
no man has been able to channel the power without eventually going completely, horribly mad, and then,
even if he has learned some control, dying from a wasting sickness that causes the sufferer to rot alive, a
sickness caused, as is the madness, by the dark ones taint onsaidin . for a woman the death that
comes without control of the power is less horrible, but it is death just the same. aes sedai search for
girls with the inborn ability as much to save their lives as to increase aes sedai numbers, and for men
with it in order to stop the terrible things they inevitably do with the power in their madness.see also



channel; time of madness; true source. pattern of an age: the wheel of time weaves the threads of
human lives into the pattern of an age, often called simply the pattern, which forms the substance of
reality for that age.see alsotaveren . powers, the five: seefive powers. questioners, the: an
order within the children of the light. their avowed purposes are to discover the truth in disputations
and to uncover darkfriends. in the search for truth and the light, their normal method of inquiry is by
torture; their normal attitude that they know the truth already and must only make their victim confess to
it. the questioners refer to themselves as the hand of the light, the hand that digs out truth, and at times
act as if they were entirely separate from the children and the council of the anointed, which commands
the children. the head of the questioners is the high inquisitor, who sits on the council of the anointed.
their sign is a bloodred shepherds crook ragan(rahgahn): a shienaran warrior, red shields: see
aiel warrior societies. renna(reennah): a seanchan woman; asuldam .see also seanchan;suldam
. rhyagelle(rheyeahgehl): in the old tongue, those who come home, or homecomers.
saangreal(sahahngreeahl): any one of a number of objects that allow an individual to channel
much more of the one power than would otherwise be possible or safe. asaangreal is like unto, but
much more powerful than, anangreal . the amount of the power that can be wielded with asaangreal
compares to the amount of the power that can be handled with anangreal as the power wielded with the
aid of anangreal does to the amount of the power that can be handled unaided. remnants of the age of
legends, the means of makingsaangreal is no longer known. only a handful remain, far fewer even than
angreal . saidar(sahihdahr): saidin (sahihdeen): seetrue source. saldaea(sahldayeeah):
one of the borderlands. sanche, siuan(sahnchay, swahn): an aes sedai formerly of the blue
ajah. raised to the amyrlin seat 985 ne. the amyrlin seat is of all ajahs, and of none. sea folk:
more properly, the athaan miere (athaahn meeair), the people of the sea. inhabitants of islands
in the aryth (ahrihth) ocean and the sea of storms, they spend little time on those islands, living most
of their lives on their ships. most seaborne trade is carried by the sea folks ships. seanchan(
shawnchan): (1) descendants of the armies artur hawkwing sent across the aryth ocean, who
have returned to reclaim the lands of their forefathers. (2) the land from which the seanchan come.see
alsohailene ;corenne ;rhyagelle . seandar(shawndahr): capital city of seanchan, where the
empress sits on the crystal throne in the court of the nine moons. selene(sehleen): a woman met
on the journey to cairhien. seta(seetah): a seanchan woman; asuldam ,see also seanchan;suldam
. shadar logoth(shahdahr lohgoth): a city abandoned and shunned since the trolloc wars. it is
tainted ground, and not a pebble of it is safe.see also mordeth. shaitan(shayihtan): seedark
one. shayol ghul(shayof ghool): a mountain in the blasted lands, the site of the dark ones
prison. sheriam(sheereeahm): an aes sedai of the blue ajah. the mistress of novices in the
white tower. shienar(shynahr): one of the borderlands. the sign of shienar is a stooping black
hawk. shoufa(shoofah): a garment of the aiel, a cloth, usually the color of sand or rock, that wraps
around the head and neck, leaving only the face bare. span: seelength, units of. spine of the world,
the: a towering mountain range, with only a few passes, which separates the aiel waste from the lands
to the west. stedding(stehdding): an ogier (ohgeer) homeland. manystedding have been
abandoned since the breaking of the world. they are shielded in some way, no longer understood, so
that within them no aes sedai can channel the one power, nor even sense that the true source exists.
attempts to wield the one power from outside astedding have no effect inside astedding boundary. no
trolloc will enter astedding unless driven, and even a myrddraal will do so only at the greatest need and
then with the greatest reluctance and distaste. even darkfriends, if truly dedicated, feel uncomfortable
within astedding . stilling: the act, performed by aes sedai, of shutting off a woman who can channel
from the one power. a woman who has been stilled can sense the true source, but she cannot touch it.
stone dogs: seeaiel warrior societies. suldam(suhldahm): a woman who has passed the tests to
show that she can wear the bracelet of anadam and thus control adamane .see also :adam ;damane .
sunday: a feastday and festival in midsummer, celebrated in many parts of the world. sung wood: see
treesinger. suroth, high lady(sueroth): a seanchan noblewoman of high degree. taishar(
tieshahr): in the old tongue, true blood of. tamaralailen(tabmahrahleyelehn): in the
old tongue, web of destiny. a great change in the pattern of an age, centered around one or more



people who aretaveren .see also pattern of an age;taveren . tanreall, artur paendrag(
tahnreeahl, ahrtuhr payehndrag): seehawkwing, artur. tarmon gaidon(tahrmohn
gaydohn): the last battle.see also dragon, prophecies of the; horn of valere. tar valon(tahr
vahlon): a city on an island in the river erinin. the center of aes sedai power, and location of the
white tower. taveren(tabveerehn): a person around whom the wheel of time weaves all
surrounding lifethreads, perhaps all lifethreads, to form a web of destiny.see also pattern of an age.
tear(teer): a great seaport on the sea of storms. telamon, lews therin(tehlahmon, looz
thehrihn): seedragon, the. terangreal(teerahngreeahl): any one of a number of remnants of
the age of legends that use the one power. unlikeangreal andsaangreal , eachterangreal was made
to do a particular thing. for example, one makes oaths taken within it binding. some are used by aes
sedai, but their original purposes are largely unknown. some will kill or destroy the ability to channel of
any woman who uses them.see alsoangreal ;saangreal . tia avende alantin(teeah ahvenday
ahlanhtin): brother to the trees. tia mi aven moridin isainde vadin: in the old tongue, the
grave is no bar to my call. inscription on the horn of valere.see also horn of valere. tigraine(
teegrain): as daughterheir of andor, she married taringail damodred and bore his son galadedrid.
her disappearance in 972 ne, shortly after her brother luc vanished in the blight, led to the struggle in
andor called the succession, and caused the events in cairhien that eventually brought on the aiel war.
her sign was a womans hand gripping a thorny rose stem with a white blossom. time of madness: the
years after the dark ones counterstroke tainted the male half of the true source, when male aes sedai
went mad and broke the world. the exact duration of this period is unknown, but it is believed to have
lasted nearly one hundred years. it ended completely only with the death of the last male aes sedai.see
also hundred companions; true source; one power; breaking of the world. tinkers: seetuathaan.
traveling people: seetuathaan. tree, the: seeavendesora. treekillers: an aiel name for the
cairhienin, always said in tones of horror and disgust. treesinger: an ogier who has the ability to sing
to trees (called treesong), either healing them, or helping them to grow and flower, or making things
from the wood without damaging the tree. objects made in this manner are called sung wood and are
highly prized. few ogier remain who are treesingers; the talent seems to be dying out. treesong: see
treesinger. trollocs(trahllohks): creatures of the dark one, created during the war of the
shadow. huge in stature, they are a twisted blend of animal and human stock. vicious by nature, they kill
for the pure pleasure of killing. deceitful in the extreme, they cannot be trusted unless coerced by fear.
they are divided into tribelike bands, among them the dhavol, the kobal, and the dhaimon. trolloc
wars: a series of wars, beginning about 1000 ab and lasting more than three hundred years, during
which trolloc armies ravaged the world. eventually the trollocs were slain or driven back into the great
blight, but some nations ceased to exist, while others were almost depopulated. all records of the time
are fragmentary.see also covenant of the ten nations. true source: the driving force of the universe,
which turns the wheel of time. it is divided into a male half (saidin) and a female half (saidar), which
work at the same time with and against each other. only a man can draw onsaidin , only a woman on
saidar . since the beginning of the time of madness,saidin has been tainted by the dark ones touch.
see also one power. tuathaan(tooahthahahn): a wandering folk, also known as the tinkers
and as the traveling people, who live in brightly painted wagons and follow a totally pacifist philosophy
called the way of the leaf. things mended by tinkers are often better than new. they are among the
few who can cross the aiel waste unmolested, for the aiel strictly avoid all contact with them. turak,
high lord of house aladon(toorak; alahdohn): a seanchan of high degree, commander of the
hailene.see also seanchan; hailene. verin(vehrihn): an aes sedai of the brown ajah. warder: a
warrior bonded to an aes sedai. the bonding is a thing of the one power, and by it he gains such gifts
as quick healing, the ability to go long periods without food, water, or rest, and the ability to sense the
taint of the dark one at a distance. so long as a warder lives, the aes sedai to whom he is bonded
knows he is alive however far away he is, and when he dies she will know the moment and manner of his
death. the bonding does not tell her how far he is, though, nor in what direction. while most ajahs
believe an aes sedai may have one warder bonded to her at a time, the red ajah refuses to bond any
warders at all, while the green ajah believe an aes sedai may bond as many warders as she wishes.



ethically the warder must accede to the bonding, but it has been known to be done involuntarily. what
the aes sedai gain from the bonding is a closely held secret.see also aes sedai. war of power: see
war of the shadow. war of the hundred years: a series of overlapping wars among constantly
shifting alliances, precipitated by the death of artur hawkwing and the resulting struggle for his empire. it
lasted from fy 994 to fy 1117. the war depopulated large parts of the lands between the aryth ocean
and the aiel waste, from the sea of storms to the great blight. so great was the destruction that only
fragmentary records of the time remain. the empire of artur hawkwing was pulled apart in the wars, and
the nations of the present day were formed.see also hawkwing, artur. war of the shadow: also
known as the war of power, it ended the age of legends. it began shortly after the attempt to free the
dark one, and soon involved the whole world. in a world where even the memory of war had been
forgotten, every facet of war was rediscovered, often twisted by the dark ones touch on the world, and
the one power was used as a weapon. the war was ended by the resealing of the dark one into his
prison.see also hundred companions, the; dragon, the. watchers over the waves: a group who
believe that the armies artur hawkwing sent across the aryth ocean will one day return, and so keep
watch from the town of falme (fahlmay) on toman head. web of destiny: seetamaralailen.
weight, units of: 10 ounces= 1 pound; 10 pounds= stone; 10 stone= hundredweight; 10
hundredweight= 1 ton. wheel of time, the: time is a wheel with seven spokes, each spoke an age. as
the wheel turns, the ages come and go, each leaving memories that fade to legend, then to myth, and are
forgotten by the time that age comes again. the pattern of an age is slightly different each time an age
comes, and each time it is subject to greater change, but each time it is the same age. whitecloaks: see
children of the light. white tower: the palace of the amyrlin seat in tar valon, and the place where
aes sedai are trained. wisdom: in villages, a woman chosen by the womens circle for her knowledge
of such things as healing, and foretelling the weather, as well as for common good sense. a position of
great responsibility and authority, both actual and implied. she is generally considered the equal of the
mayor, just as the womens circle is the equal of the village council. unlike the mayor, the wisdom is
chosen for life, and it is very rare for a wisdom to be removed from office before her death. depending
on the land, she may instead have another title, such as guide, healer, wise woman, or reader.

map 1  two rivers



map 2  andor



map 3  borderlands



it shall come to pass that what men made shall be shattered, and the shadow shall lie across the
pattern of the age, and the dark one shall once more lay his hand upon the world of man.
women shall weep and men quail as the nations of the earth are rent like rotting cloth. neither
shall anything stand nor abide . . .

yet one shall be born to face the shadow, born once more as he was born before and shall be
born again, time without end. the dragon shall be reborn, and there shall be wailing and
gnashing of teeth at his rebirth. in sackcloth and ashes shall he clothe the people, and he shall
break the world again by his coming, tearing apart all ties that bind. like the unfettered dawn



shall he blind us, and burn us, yet shall the dragon reborn confront the shadow at the last
battle, and his blood shall give us the light. let tears flow, o ye people of the world. weep for
your salvation.

 fromthe karaethon cycle:
the prophecies of the dragon,
as translated by ellaine mariseidin alshinn,
chief librarian at the court of arafel,
in the year of grace 231
of the new era, the third age

prologue

in the shadow
the man who called himself bors, at least in this place, sneered at the low murmuring that rolled around
the vaulted chamber like the soft gabble of geese. his grimace was hidden by the black silk mask that
covered his face, though, just like the masks that covered the hundred other faces in the chamber. a
hundred black masks, and a hundred pairs of eyes trying to see what lay behind them.
if one did not look too closely, the huge room could have been in a palace, with its tall marble fireplaces
and its golden lamps hanging from the domed ceiling, its colorful tapestries and intricately patterned
mosaic floor. if one did not look too closely. the fireplaces were cold, for one thing. flames danced on
logs as thick as a mans leg, but gave no heat. the walls behind the tapestries, the ceiling high above the
lamps, were undressed stone, almost black. there were no windows, and only two doorways, one at
either end of the room. it was as if someone had intended to give the semblance of a palace reception
chamber but had not cared enough to bother with more than the outline and a few touches for detail.
where the chamber was, the man who called himself bors did not know, nor did he think any of the
others knew. he did not like to think about where it might be. it was enough that he had been
summoned. he did not like to think about that, either, but for such a summons, even he came.
he shifted his cloak, thankful that the fires were cold, else it would have been too hot for the black wool
draping him to the floor. all his clothes were black. the bulky folds of the cloak hid the stoop he used to
disguise his height, and bred confusion as to whether he was thin or thick. he was not the only one there
enveloped in a tailors span of cloth.
silently he watched his companions. patience had marked much of his life. always, if he waited and
watched long enough, someone made a mistake. most of the men and women here might have had the



same philosophy; they watched, and listened silently to those who had to speak. some people could not
bear waiting, or silence, and so gave away more than they knew.
servants circulated through the guests, slender, goldenhaired youths proffering wine with a bow and a
wordless smile. young men and young women alike, they wore tight white breeches and flowing white
shirts. and male and female alike, they moved with disturbing grace. each looked more than a mirror
image of the others, the boys as handsome as the girls were beautiful. he doubted he could distinguish
one from another, and he had an eye and a memory for faces.
a smiling, whiteclad girl offered her tray of crystal goblets to him. he took one with no intention of
drinking; it might appear untrusting  or worse, and either could be deadly here  if he refused
altogether, but anything could be slipped into a drink. surely some among his companions would have no
objections to seeing the number of their rivals for power dwindle, whomever the unlucky ones happened
to be.
idly he wondered whether the servants would have to be disposed of after this meeting.servants hear
everything . as the serving girl straightened from her bow, his eye caught hers above that sweet smile.
blank eyes. empty eyes. a dolls eyes. eyes more dead than death.
he shivered as she moved gracefully away, and raised the goblet to his lips before he caught himself. it
was not what had been done to the girl that chilled him. rather, every time he thought he detected a
weakness in those he now served, he found himself preceded, the supposed weakness cut out with a
ruthless precision that left him amazed. and worried. the first rule of his life had always been to search
for weakness, for every weakness was a chink where he could probe and pry and influence. if his current
masters, his masters for the moment, had no weakness . . .
frowning behind his mask, he studied his companions. at least there was plenty of weakness there.
their nervousness betrayed them, even those who had sense enough to guard their tongues. a stiffness in
the way this one held himself, a jerkiness in the way that one handled her skirts.
a good quarter of them, he estimated, had not bothered with disguise beyond the black masks. their
clothes told much. a woman standing before a goldandcrimson wall hanging, speaking softly to a figure
 impossible to say whether it was man or woman  cloaked and hooded in gray. she had obviously
chosen the spot because the colors of the tapestry set off her garb. doubly foolish to draw attention to
herself, for her scarlet dress, cut low in the bodice to show too much flesh and high at the hem to display
golden slippers, marked her from illian, and a woman of wealth, perhaps even of noble blood.
not far beyond the illianer, another woman stood, alone and admirably silent. with a swans neck and
lustrous black hair falling in waves below her waist, she kept her back to the stone wall, observing
everything. no nervousness there, only serene selfpossession. very admirable, that, but her coppery
skin and her creamy, highnecked gown  leaving nothing but her hands uncovered, yet clinging and
only just barely opaque, so that it hinted at everything and revealed nothing  marked her just as clearly
of the first blood of arad doman. and unless the man who called himself bors missed his guess entirely,
the wide golden bracelet on her left wrist bore her house symbols. they would be for her own house;
no domani bloodborn would bend her stiff pride enough to wear the sigils of another house. worse than
foolishness.
a man in a highcollared, skyblue shienaran coat passed him with a wary, headtotoe glance though
the eyeholes of his mask. the mans carriage named him soldier; the set of his shoulders, the way his
gaze never rested in one place for long, and the way his hand seemed ready to dart for a sword that was
not there, all proclaimed it. the shienaran wasted little time on the man who called himself bors; stooped



shoulders and a bent back held no threat.
the man who called himself bors snorted as the shienaran moved on, right hand clenching and eyes
already studying elsewhere for danger. he could read them all, to class and country. merchant and
warrior, commoner and noble. from kandor and cairhien, saldaea and ghealdan. from every nation
and nearly every people. his nose wrinkled in sudden disgust. even a tinker, in bright green breeches
and a virulent yellow coat.we can do without thosecome the day .
the disguised ones were no better, many of them, cloaked and shrouded as they were. he caught sight,
under the edge of one dark robe, of the silverworked boots of a high lord of tear, and under another
a glimpse of golden lionhead spurs, worn only by high officers in the andoran queens guards. a
slender fellow  slender even in a floordragging black robe and an anonymous gray cloak caught with a
plain silver pin  watched from the shadows of his deep cowl. he could be anyone, from anywhere . . .
except for the sixpointed star tattooed on the web between thumb and forefinger of his right hand. one
of the sea folk then, and a look at his left hand would show the marks of his clan and line. the man who
called himself bors did not bother to try.
suddenly his eyes narrowed, fixing on a woman enveloped in black till nothing showed but her fingers.
on her right hand rested a gold ring in the shape of a serpent eating its own tail. aes sedai, or at least a
woman trained in tar valon by aes sedai. none else would wear that ring. either way made no
difference to him. he looked away before she could notice his watching, and almost immediately he
spotted another woman swathed from head to toe in black and wearing a great serpent ring. the two
witches gave no sign that they knew each other. in the white tower they sat like spiders in the middle of
a web, pulling the strings that made kings and queens dance, meddling.curse them all to death eternal!
he realized that he was grinding his teeth. if numbers must dwindle  and they must, before the day 
there were some who would be missed even less than tinkers.
a chime sounded, a single, shivering note that came from everywhere at once and cut off all other
sounds like a knife.
the tall doors at the far end of the chamber swung open, and two trollocs stepped into the room,
spikes decorating the black mail that hung to their knees. everyone shied back. even the man who called
himself bors.
head and shoulders taller than the tallest man there, they were a stomachturning blend of man and
animal, human faces twisted and altered. one had a heavy, pointed beak where his mouth and nose
should have been, and feathers covered his head instead of hair. the other walked on hooves, his face
pushed out in a hairy muzzle, and goat horns stuck up above his ears.
ignoring the humans, the trollocs turned back toward the door and bowed, servile and cringing. the
feathers on the one lifted in a tight crest.
a myrddraal stepped between them, and they fell to their knees. it was garbed in black that made the
trollocs mail and the humans masks seem bright, garments that hung still, without a ripple, as it moved
with a vipers grace.
the man who called himself bors felt his lips drawing back over his teeth, half snarl and half, he was
shamed to admit even to himself, fear. it had its face uncovered. its pasty pale face, a mans face, but
eyeless as an egg, like a maggot in a grave.
the smooth white face swiveled, regarding them all one by one, it seemed. a visible shiver ran through



them under that eyeless look. thin, bloodless lips quirked in what might almost have been a smile as, one
by one, the masked ones tried to press back into the crowd, milling to avoid that gaze. the myrddraals
look shaped them into a semicircle facing the door.
the man who called himself bors swallowed.there will come a day, halfman. when the great lord
of the dark comes again, he will choose his new dreadlords, and you will cower before them. you
will cower before men. before me! why doesnt it speak? stop staring at me, and speak!
your master comes. the myrddraals voice rasped like a dry snake skin crumbling. to your bellies,
worms! grovel, lest his brilliance blind and burn you!
rage filled the man who called himself bors, at the tone as much as the words, but then the air above the
halfman shimmered, and the import drove home.it cant be! it cant. . . ! the trollocs were already on
their bellies, writhing as if they wanted to burrow into the floor.
without waiting to see if anyone else moved, the man who called himself bors dropped facedown,
grunting as he bruised himself on the stone. words sprang to his lips like a charm against danger  they
were a charm, though a thin reed against what he feared  and he heard a hundred other voices, breathy
with fear, speaking the same against the floor.
the great lord of the dark is my master, and most heartily do i serve him to the last shred of my very
soul. in the back of his mind a voice chattered with fear. the dark one and all the forsaken are
bound . . .shivering, he forced it to silence. he had abandoned that voice long since. lo, my master is
deaths master. asking nothing do i serve against the day of his coming, yet do i serve in the sure and
certain hope of life everlasting. . . .bound in shayol ghul, bound by the creator at the moment of
creation. no, i serve a different master now. surely the faithful shall be exalted in the land, exalted
above the unbelievers; exalted above thrones, yet do i serve humbly against the day of his return.the
hand of the creator shelters us all, and the light protects us from the shadow. no, no! a different
master . swift come the day of return. swift come the great lord of the dark to guide us and rule the
world forever and ever.
the man who called himself bors finished the creed panting, as if he had run ten miles. the rasp of
breath all around told him he was not the only one.
rise. all of you, rise.
the mellifluous voice took him by surprise. surely none of his companions, lying on their bellies with their
masked faces pressed to the mosaic tiles, would have spoken, but it was not the voice he expected from
. . . cautiously, he raised his head enough to see with one eye.
the figure of a man floated in the air above the myrddraal, the hem of his bloodred robe hanging a span
over the halfmans head. masked in bloodred, too. would the great lord of the dark appear to them
as a man? and masked, besides? yet the myrddraal, its very gaze fear, trembled and almost cowered
where it stood in the figures shadow. the man who called himself bors grasped for an answer his mind
could contain without splitting. one of the forsaken, perhaps.
that thought was only a little less painful. even so, it meant the day of the dark ones return must be
close at hand if one of the forsaken was free. the forsaken, thirteen of the most powerful wielders of
the one power in an age filled with powerful wielders, had been sealed up in shayol ghul along with the
dark one, sealed away from the world of men by the dragon and the hundred companions. and the
backblast of that sealing had tainted the male half of the true source; and all the male aes sedai, those



cursed wielders of the power, went mad and broke the world, tore it apart like a pottery bowl smashed
on rocks, ending the age of legends before they died, rotting while they still lived. a fitting death for aes
sedai, to his mind. too good for them. he regretted only that the women had been spared.
slowly, painfully, he forced the panic to the back of his mind, confined it and held it tight though it
screamed to get out. it was the best he could do. none of those on their bellies had risen, and only a few
had even dared raise their heads.
rise. there was a snap in the redmasked figures voice this time. he gestured with both hands.
stand!
the man who called himself bors scrambled up awkwardly, but halfway to his feet, he hesitated. those
gesturing hands were horribly burned, crisscrossed by black fissures, the raw flesh between as red as the
figures robes.would the dark one appear so? or even one of the forsaken? the eyeholes of that
bloodred mask swept slowly across him, and he straightened hastily. he thought he could feel the heat
of an open furnace in that gaze.
the others obeyed the command with no more grace and no less fear in their rising. when all were on
their feet, the floating figure spoke.
i have been known by many names, but the one by which you shall know me is baalzamon.
the man who called himself bors clamped his teeth to keep them from chattering. baalzamon. in the
trolloc tongue, it meant heart of the dark, and even unbelievers knew it was the trolloc name for the
great lord of the dark. he whose name must not be uttered. not the true name, shaitan, but still
forbidden. among those gathered here, and others of their kind, to sully either with a human tongue was
blasphemy. his breath whistled through his nostrils, and all around him he could hear others panting
behind their masks. the servants were gone, and the trollocs as well, though he had not seen them go.
the place where you stand lies in the shadow of shayol ghul. more than one voice moaned at that;
the man who called himself bors was not sure his own was not among them. a touch of what might
almost be called mockery entered baalzamons voice as he spread his arms wide. fear not, for the
day of your masters rising upon the world is near at hand. the day of return draws nigh. does it not
tell you so that i am here, to be seen by you favored few among your brothers and sisters? soon the
wheel of time will be broken. soon the great serpent will die, and with the power of that death, the
death of time itself, your master will remake the world in his own image for this age and for all ages to
come. and those who serve me, faithful and steadfast, will sit at my feet above the stars in the sky and
rule the world of men forever. so have i promised, and so shall it be, without end. you shall live and rule
forever.
a murmur of anticipation ran through the listeners, and some even took a step forward, toward the
floating, crimson shape, their eyes lifted, rapturous. even the man who called himself bors felt the pull of
that promise, the promise for which he had dealt away his soul a hundred times over.
the day of return comes closer, baalzamon said. but there is much yet to do. much to do.
the air to baalzamons left shimmered and thickened, and the figure of a young man hung there, a little
lower than baalzamon. the man who called himself bors could not decide whether it was a living being
or not. a country lad, by his clothes, with a light of mischief in his brown eyes and the hint of a smile on
his lips, as if in memory or anticipation of a prank. the flesh looked warm, but the chest did not move
with breath, the eyes did not blink.



the air to baalzamons right wavered as if with heat, and a second countryclad figure hung suspended
a little below baalzamon. a curlyhaired youth, as heavily muscled as a blacksmith. and an oddity: a
battle axe hung at his side, a great, steel halfmoon balanced by a thick spike. the man who called
himself bors suddenly leaned forward, intent on an even greater strangeness. a youth with yellow eyes.
for the third time air solidified into the shape of a young man, this time directly under baalzamons eye,
almost at his feet. a tall fellow, with eyes now gray, now almost blue as the light took them, and dark,
reddish hair. another villager, or farmer. the man who called himself bors gasped. yet another thing out
of the ordinary, though he wondered why he should expect anything to be ordinary here. a sword swung
from the figures belt, a sword with a bronze heron on the scabbard and another inset into the long,
twohanded hilt.a village boywith a heronmark blade? impossible! what can it mean? and a boy
with yelloweyes. he noticed the myrddraal looking at the figures, trembling; and unless he misjudged
entirely, its trembling was no longer fear, but hatred.
dead silence had fallen, silence that baalzamon let deepen before he spoke. there is now one who
walks the world, one who was and will be, but is not yet, the dragon.
a startled murmur ran through his listeners.
the dragon reborn! we are to kill him, great lord? that from the shienaran, hand grasping eagerly
at his side where his sword would hang.
perhaps, baalzamon said simply. and perhaps not. perhaps he can be turned to my use. sooner or
later it will be so, in this age or another.
the man who called himself bors blinked.in this age or another? i thought the day of return was
near. what matter to me what happens in another age if i grow old and die waiting in this one?
but baalzamon was speaking again.
already a bend is forming in the pattern, one of many points where he who will become the dragon
may be turned to my service. must be turned! better that he serve me alive than dead, but alive or dead,
serve me he must and will! these three you must know, for each is a thread in the pattern i mean to
weave, and it will be up to you to see that they are placed as i command. study them well, that you will
know them.
abruptly all sound was gone. the man who called himself bors shifted uneasily, and saw others doing
the same. all but the illianer, woman, he realized. with her hands spread over her bosom as if to hide the
rounded flesh she exposed, eyes wide, half frightened and half ecstatic, she was nodding eagerly as
though to someone facetoface with her. sometimes she appeared to give a reply, but the man who
called himself bors heard not a word. suddenly she arched backwards, trembling and rising on her toes.
he could not see why she did not fall, unless something unseen held her. then, just as abruptly, she
settled back to her feet and nodded again, bowing, shivering. even as she straightened, one of the
women wearing a great serpent ring gave a start and began nodding.
so each of us hears his own instructions, and none hears anothers. the man who called himself
bors muttered in frustration. if he knew what even one other was commanded, he might be able to use
the knowledge to advantage, but this way . . . impatiently he waited for his turn, forgetting himself enough
to stand straight.
one by one the gathering received their orders, each walled in silence yet still giving tantalizing clues, if



only he could read them. the man of the athaan miere, the sea folk, stiffening with reluctance as he
nodded. the shienaran, his stance bespeaking confusion even while he acquiesced. the second woman
of tar valon giving a start, as of shock, and the grayswathed figure whose sex he could not determine
shaking its head before falling to its knees and nodding vigorously. some underwent the same convulsion
as the illianer woman, as if pain itself lifted them to toe tips.
bors.
the man who called himself bors jerked as a red mask filled his eyes. he could still see the room, still
see the floating shape of baalzamon and the three figures before him, but at the same time all he could
see was the redmasked face. dizzy, he felt as if his skull were splitting open and his eyes were being
pushed out of his head. for a moment he thought he could see flames through the eyeholes of the mask.
are you faithful . . . bors?
the hint of mocking in the name sent a chill down his backbone. i am faithful, great lord. i cannot hide
from you.i am faithful! i swear it!
no, you cannot.
the certainty in baalzamons voice dried his mouth, but he forced himself to speak. command me,
great lord, and i obey.
firstly, you are to return to tarabon and continue yourgood works. in fact, i command you to
redouble your efforts.
he stared at baalzamon in puzzlement, but then fires flared again behind the mask, and he took the
excuse of a bow to pull his eyes away. as you command, great lord, so shall it be.
secondly, you will watch for the three young men, and have your followers watch. be warned; they are
dangerous.
the man who called himself bors glanced at the figures floating in front of baalzamon.how can i do
that? i can see them, but i cant see anything except hisface . his head felt about to burst. sweat
slicked his hands under his thin gloves, and his shirt clung to his back. dangerous, great lord?
farmboys? is one of them the  
a sword is dangerous to the man at the point, but not to the man at the hilt. unless the man holding the
sword is a fool, or careless, or unskilled, in which case it is twice as dangerous to him as to anyone else.
it is enough that i have told you to know them. it is enough that you obey me.
as you command, great lord, so shall it be.
thirdly, regarding those who have landed at toman head, and the domani. of this you will speak to
no one. when you return to tarabon . . .
the man who called himself bors realized as he listened that his mouth was sagging open. the
instructions made no sense.if i knew what some of the others were told, perhaps i could piece it
together .
abruptly he felt his head grasped as though by a giant hand crushing his temples, felt himself being lifted,



and the world blew apart in a thousand starbursts, each flash of light becoming an image that fled across
his mind or spun and dwindled into the distance before he could more than barely grasp it. an impossible
sky of striated clouds, red and yellow and black, racing as if driven by the mightiest wind the world had
ever seen. a woman  a girl?  dressed in white receded into blackness and vanished as soon as she
appeared. a raven stared him in the eye, knowing him, and was gone. an armored man in a brutal helm,
shaped and painted and gilded like some monstrous, poisonous insect, raised a sword and plunged to
one side, beyond his view. a horn, curled and golden, came hurtling out of the far distance. one piercing
note it sounded as it flashed toward him, tugging his soul. at the last instant it flashed into a blinding,
golden ring of light that passed through him, chilling him beyond death. a wolf leaped from the shadows
of lost sight and ripped out his throat. he could not scream. the torrent went on, drowning him, burying
him. he could barely remember who he was, or what he was. the skies rained fire, and the moon and
stars fell; rivers ran in blood, and the dead walked; the earth split open and fountained molten rock . . .
the man who called himself bors found himself half crouching in the chamber with the others, most
watching him, all silent. wherever he looked, up or down or in any direction, the masked face of
baalzamon overwhelmed his eyes. the images that had flooded into his mind were fading; he was sure
many were already gone from memory. hesitantly, he straightened, baalzamon always before him.
great lord, what  ?
some commands are too important to be known even by he who carries them out.
the man who called himself bors bent almost double in his bow. as you command, great lord, he
whispered hoarsely, so shall it be.
when he straightened, he was alone in silence once more. another, the taren high lord, nodded and
bowed to someone none else saw. the man who called himself bors put an unsteady hand to his brow,
trying to hold on to something of what had burst through his mind, though he was not completely certain
he wanted to remember. the last remnant flickered out, and suddenly he was wondering what it was that
he was trying to recall.i know there was something, but what? there wassomething! wasnt there?
he rubbed his hands together, grimacing at the feel of sweat under his gloves, and turned his attention to
the three figures hanging suspended before baalzamons floating form.
the muscular, curlyhaired youth; the farmer with the sword; and the lad with the look of mischief on his
face. already, in his mind, the man who called himself bors had named them the blacksmith, the
swordsman, and the trickster.what is their place in the puzzle? they must be important, or
baalzamon would not have made them the center of this gathering. but from his orders alone they could
all die at any time, and he had to think that some of the others, at least, had orders as deadly for the
three.how important are they? blue eyes could mean the nobility of andor  unlikely in those clothes
 and there were borderlanders with light eyes, as well as some tareni, not to mention a few from
ghealdan, and, of course . . . no, no help there. butyellow eyes?who arethey? what arethey?
he started at a touch on his arm, and looked around to find one of the whiteclad servants, a young
man, standing by his side. the others were back, too, more than before, one for each of the masked. he
blinked. baalzamon was gone. the myrddraal was gone, too, and only rough stone was where the door
it had used had been. the three figures still hung there, though. he felt as if they were staring at him.
if it please you, my lord bors, i will show you to your room.
avoiding those dead eyes, he glanced once more at the three figures, then followed. uneasily he
wondered how the youth had known what name to use. it was not until the strange carved doors closed



behind him and they had walked a dozen paces that he realized he was alone in the corridor with the
servant. his brows drew down suspiciously behind his mask, but before he could open his mouth, the
servant spoke.
the others are also being shown to their rooms, my lord. if you please, my lord? time is short, and
our master is impatient.
the man who called himself bors ground his teeth, both at the lack of information and at the implication
of sameness between himself and the servant, but he followed in silence. only a fool ranted at a servant,
and worse, remembering the fellows eyes, he was not sure it would do any good.and how did he know
what i was going to ask? the servant smiled.
the man who called himself bors did not feel at all comfortable until he was back in the room where he
had waited on first arriving, and then not much. even finding the seals on his saddlebags untouched was
small comfort.
the servant stood in the hallway, not entering. you may change to your own garments if you wish, my
lord. none will see you depart here, nor arrive at your destination, but it may be best to arrive already
properly clothed. someone will come soon to show you the way.
untouched by any visible hand, the door swung shut.
the man who called himself bors shivered in spite of himself. hastily he undid the seals and buckles of
his saddlebags and pulled out his usual cloak. in the back of his mind a small voice wondered if the
promised power, even the immortality, was worth another meeting like this, but he laughed it down
immediately.for that much power, i would praise the great lord of the dark under the dome of
truth . remembering the commands given him by baalzamon, he fingered the golden, flaring sun
worked on the breast of the white cloak, and the red shepherds crook behind the sun, symbol of his
office in the world of men, and he almost laughed. there was work, great work, to be done in tarabon,
and on almoth plain.





